Diversity and the ADA

What is Diversity in the Workplace?

Broadly defined, workplace diversity is the understanding, valuing, and 
effective management of the ethnic, socio-economic, and gender variety or 
diversity within an organization's workforce and among its customers. Many 
companies have recognized the importance of addressing the issue of diversity 
and are moving forward to establish and develop successful diversity 
initiatives. A primary catalyst causing workplace diversity is the demographic 
shift of the U.S. population and, therefore, of the U.S. workforce. 

Demographic studies show that the composition of the population in the U.S. is 
more diverse than it has ever been.  According to the Census Bureau, nonwhites 
will represent more than one-third of the U.S. population by the year 2010 and 
close to half of the U.S. population by the year 2050.  By the year 2005, the 
ethnic minority share of the workforce will likely reach 28 percent, up from 18 
percent in 1980 and 22 percent in 1990. It is projected that by the year 2010, 
Hispanic-Americans will comprise the largest minority group in the U.S.  As the 
number of persons with disabilities grows, so too does the number of persons of 
color living with a disability.  Minority persons with disabilities are 
disproportionately represented among the unemployed, and the employment outlook 
for them is bleak.

Given these changes in the population and in the labor market, there is an 
increased reliance on non-traditional workers and the opportunity for 
organizations and individuals to capitalize on the array of ideas, creativity, 
and potential contributions inherent in a diverse workforce. Attracting, 
recruiting, developing, and retaining a qualified workforce from diverse 
populations is and will continue to be critical for business survival and 
organizational success.

What Is the Americans with Disabilities Act?

The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), passed in 1990, is legislation that 
is intended to "establish a clear and comprehensive prohibition of 
discrimination on the basis of disability" and to ensure access and 
participation in society for persons with disabilities.  The statute is 
specifically directed at employment, public accommodations, public services 
(i.e., services delivered by state and local governments), transportation, and 
telecommunications.  Title I of the ADA prohibits employers with 15 or more 
employees from discriminating against qualified persons with disabilities in all 
terms, conditions, and privileges of employment, including recruitment, pre-
employment screening, hiring, benefits, promotions, layoff, and termination.  
The ADA also applies to labor organizations, employment agencies, and joint-
management committees.

The ADA also requires employers to provide reasonable accommodations to 
qualified persons with disabilities that will enable them to perform the 
essential functions of jobs held or desired.  An employer may not deny an 
employment opportunity to a qualified applicant or employee with a disability 
because of a request or need for a reasonable accommodation.  An employer does 
not have to provide an accommodation if it can demonstrate that it would be an 
undue hardship to do so.  

Addressing Diversity and the ADA

The term diversity can encompass several dimensions, such as race, ethnicity, 
gender, age, religion, sexual orientation, and disability.  Diversity, 
disability, and human resource professionals need to be aware of these 
dimensions when helping their companies recruit and retain employees, sell in 
the marketplace, and define diversity within their organizations. Persons with 
disabilities, including minority persons with disabilities, have the ability to 
make positive contributions in the workplace and to the success of 
organizations.

Today, diversity initiatives are less "affirmative action"-oriented in that they 
now reflect both valuing diversity and managing diversity. Valuing diversity 
involves recognizing and appreciating the differences of individuals.  Managing 
diversity emphasizes developing company policies, goals, and a culture that 
optimizes the productivity of all employees, by understanding their unique 
needs, motivations, and contributions. Also, model initiatives have revealed 
that diversity initiatives require the visible support of and commitment from 
senior management.
 
Successful diversity initiatives can include an array of programs.  Generally 
included is some form of training, as well as efforts to change the 
communication norms of the organization.  Specifically, employee surveys, 
employee networks, diversity management training, mentoring programs, and the 
use of company intranets are frequently put in place to assess and broaden the 
attitudes of employees and management.  Many corporations also examine their 
reward systems to ensure that employees are not being evaluated on their 
personal style, but rather on the merits of their work.  As a part of the 
initiative, flexibility is sometimes incorporated into the work schedule.

Employers are also making strides in assuring compliance with ADA employment 
provisions in their work environments.  This may mean training staff on the 
following topics relating to ADA implementation: 

* Employment pre-screening and applicant interviewing under the ADA
* Relationship between the ADA with other state and federal employment and non-
discrimination laws
* Writing job descriptions that clearly identify essential job functions
* The reasonable accommodation process 
* Career equity/promotional considerations for persons with disabilities
* Non-discriminatory performance appraisals 
* Employee relations with employees with disabilities (minority and non-
minority)
* Customer relations with customers with disabilities 
* Negotiation/conflict management in the reasonable accommodation process

In summary, the implications for employers of addressing and understanding 
diversity and disability as related considerations include:

* Enhanced recruitment and retention efforts 
* Improved productivity
* Expanded training programs that include both diversity (ethnicity, gender, and 
religion) and disabilities Expanded policies and programs
* Improved morale  

What Is Reasonable Accommodation?

Reasonable accommodation is any modification of or adjustment to a job, an 
employment practice, or the work environment that makes it possible for a 
qualified individual with a disability to apply for and perform the essential 
functions of a job.

Reasonable accommodation includes, but is not limited to, modification or 
adjustment of the application process to enable individuals with disabilities to 
apply for work, making facilities readily accessible to and usable by persons 
with disabilities, modifying work schedules, reallocation of non-essential job 
functions, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, and reassignment 
to a vacant position.  An employer is not required to reallocate essential job 
functions or to create "light-duty" positions.
  
An employer is not required to provide a reasonable accommodation if it can 
demonstrate that it would be an undue hardship to do so.  Whether a reasonable 
accommodation creates an undue hardship is a factual issue depending on factors 
such as the nature and net cost of the accommodation and the size and nature of 
the business.  The duty of reasonable accommodation is situation-specific.  

What Is The Reasonable Accommodation Process?

 To identify a reasonable accommodation under the ADA, if an effective 
accommodation is not obvious, the employer and employee may wish to engage in a 
flexible interactive process/discussion.  Generally, if an individual with a 
disability wants a reasonable accommodation, he or she must request one.  If the 
employer has not done so, it should determine the essential functions of the job 
involved, then consult with the individual requesting accommodation to determine 
the job-related limitations imposed by the individual's disability and how those 
limitations could be overcome with a reasonable accommodation.  The possible 
accommodations should be evaluated and an effective accommodation selected.  
While the employee's preference is given consideration, the employer has the 
discretion to chose between equally effective reasonable accommodations. 

It is important that the concept of non-discrimination and equal access for all 
persons with disabilities be an ongoing discussion in the workplace. Making an 
accommodation that meets an individual's specific needs is less difficult when 
organizations foster a climate that is agreeable to complying with the 
principles and requirements of the ADA.  An example is when a person has 
difficulty performing a nonessential job function and the accommodation is to 
have other employees pick up some of those tasks.  Effecting such a task 
reallocation is usually easier when employees are prepared through prior 
training and ongoing group dialogue on accommodation issues. 

The ADA contains strict confidentiality requirements pertaining to medical 
information obtained during a medical examination or inquiry.  Medical 
information must be collected and maintained on separate forms and in separate 
medical files and be kept confidential.  There are certain narrow circumstances 
when such information may be disclosed, including informing supervisors and 
managers about necessary work restrictions or accommodations.

What are some suggested strategies for heightening awareness of workplace 
diversity considerations, multicultural persons with disabilities, and the ADA?

Successful implementation of both diversity and ADA initiatives require efforts 
to change corporate culture and attitudes.  Both suggest the need for staff 
training on non-discrimination practices, diversity awareness, diversity skills, 
flexibility in work schedules, and investigation of employee evaluation and 
reward structures.  The parallel nature of these strategies suggests that the 
combination of disability and diversity initiatives is possible and would likely 
be advantageous to the success of both efforts. 

Selected strategies that may both further diversity initiatives and 
implementation of the ADA include:

* Diversity initiatives that include active recruitment and retention of 
individuals of all backgrounds with disabilities in the workplace through 
collaborative agreements with state Vocational Rehabilitation agencies or local 
job placement services for individuals with disabilities.
* Development of targeted job programs for minorities with disabilities
* Development of a mentoring program for people with disabilities
* Making training, development, and promotional opportunities available to all 
minorities seeking job advancement.  For individuals of all backgrounds with 
disabilities, this may include supplying needed supports to enable them to 
access training, considering new positions, or acquiring needed retraining when 
a disability occurs that prevents a return to the original job position. 
* Integration of the nondiscrimination requirements of the ADA and Title VII of 
the Civil Rights Act for persons with disabilities in all facets of staff 
training and human resources practices. 

These are only a few of many proactive initiatives that employers can take to 
recruit and retain individuals with disabilities in the workplace, thereby 
expanding their potential labor pool and maximizing human resources to enhance 
workplace outcomes.

Diversity and Disability Resources  

Books:
 Beyond Race & Gender, R. Roosevelt Thomas, Jr.

Designing & Implementing Successful Diversity Initiatives, Lawrence Baytos

Diverse Teams At Work, Lee Gardenswartz, PhD & Anita Rowe, PhD

Race Matters, Cornel West

Redefining Diversity, R. Roosevelt Thomas, Jr.

Videos:
Blue-Eyed, Brown-Eyed, California Newsreel, 149 Ninth Street/420, San  
Francisco, CA 94103; Phone: 415/621-6196; Fax: 415/621-6522; Internet: 
http://www.newsreel.org

Diversity Management, Roosevelt Thomas, Society for Human Resource Management, 
SHRMStore, 800/444-5006 or www.shrm.org/shrmstore 

Hotline: 

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center Hotline,
800/949-4232 (voice/TDD).

Websites (Cultural Diversity & Disabilities): 

Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) http://www.shrm.org

SHRM Diversity Web Page:  www.shrm.org/diversity 
(SHRM membership number needed)

American Association of People with Disabilities
http://www.aapd.com

American Institute for Managing Diversity
Morehouse College
Box 83, 351-55 Westview Drive
Atlanta, GA 30314
(404) 756-1170
http://www.aimd.org

American Society for Training and Development
1640 Kings Street, Box 1443
Alexandria, VA 22313
(703) 683-8100.  
http://www.astd.org

Catalyst
http://www.catalystwomen.org

Department of Justice ADA Home Page
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm

The Disability Forum
http://www.emplyease.com/disability

Institute for Corporate Diversity has a web site that provides access to 
diversity news and resources. 
http://www.diversityonline.com

Job Accommodation Network has useful information about working effectively with 
employees with disabilities. 
918 Chestnut Ridge Road, Suite 1
Morgantown, WV 26506-6080
(800) ADA-WORK (voice/TDD).  
http://janweb.icdi.wvu.edu

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
http://www.naacp.org

National Association for Diversity Management provides a forum for worldwide 
networking on the topic of diversity.
http://www.nadm.org

The National Forum on People's Differences maintains an interactive web site 
that allows visitors to pose diversity-related questions that are answered by 
experts. 
http://www.yforum.com

National Multicultural Institute
http://www.nmci.org

Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities 
http://www.dol.gov/dol/_sec/public/programs/ptfead/main.htm

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Best Practices Study Results)
1801 L Street, NW
Washington, DC 20507
(800) 669-4000 (voice)
(800) 800-3302 (TDD)
(800) 666-EEOC (publications). 
http://www.eeoc.gov


Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment and Disability, School 
of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension Division, Cornell University, and 
funded by a grant from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
and Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those 
of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's 
interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 
1630), Technical Assistance Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement 
Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide information, materials, and technical 
assistance to individuals and entities that are covered by the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, and/or 
technical assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, and are neither a 
determination of your legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor 
binding on any agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued enforcement guidance 
which provides additional clarification of various elements of the Title I 
provisions under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance documents are available for 
viewing and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 


Diversity and the ADA

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices and workplace 
accommodations for persons with disabilities edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, 
Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, Program on Employment and Disability, School of 
Industrial and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University.  It has 
been updated by Jennifer Rhodes, Diversity Initiative Manager, Society for Human 
Resource Management, from the original, which was written in 1996 by Susanne M. 
Bruyère.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. Department of 
Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research as a 
National Materials Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of new 
brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on Employment and Disability 
and  the Pacific Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also conducting employment policy and 
practices research, examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been funded by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research (Grant #H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on Employment of 
Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be found at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports relating to employment practices 
and policies on disability civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment and Disability, 
Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 
(Voice), 607/255-2891 (TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from the ADA Technical Assistance Program and 
Regional Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 
(voice/TTY), www.adata.org.


March 2001 CORNELL UNIVERSITY

