YOUR EMPLOYEES AND CANCER - WORKING TOGETHER


What is Cancer? 1
Cancer is a disease that knows no boundaries.  It strikes at every age and every 
demographic area.  There are few people whose lives have not been touched by 
cancer, either because they have had cancer, or because they know a family 
member or friend who has or has had cancer.

The word "cancer" refers to a group of diseases that are characterized by the 
uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells.  It is also characterized by the spread 
of abnormal cells.  Scientists do not know for sure exactly how a particular 
type of cancer is caused, but believe it is caused by a combination of external 
and internal factors.  If not treated, cancer can cause death.

How is Cancer Treated? 2
Cancer is generally treated by several different methods, including surgery, 
radiation, chemotherapy, hormones and immunotherapy.   Many of these treatments 
require substantial recovery time and may have significant side effects.

Who Gets Cancer? 3
No one is immune from cancer.  Most people do not develop cancer until they are 
middle-aged.  A very high percentage [80%] of cancers are diagnosed at ages 55 
and older.  Many of these individuals, therefore, are diagnosed well before 
typical retirement age.  Approximately 8.9 million Americans who had a history 
of cancer were alive in 1997.   Of this 8.9 million people, some were considered 
cured, others were living with cancer, and others were undergoing treatment.

According to the American Cancer Society, about 1,268,000 new cancer cases are 
expected to be diagnosed in 2001.  It is anticipated that more than one half 
million Americans will die of cancer in 2001.  Cancer causes 25% of the deaths 
in the United States, making it the second leading cause of death in the United 
States.

However, many people do survive this disease. The five-year survival rate for 
all cancers combined is 60%.  This five-year survival rate represents persons 
who are alive five years after diagnosis, although they may be disease-free, in 
remission, or undergoing treatment.  It is also important to recognize that 
these survival rates are based on patients who were diagnosed at least eight 
years ago and, therefore, do not reflect advances in treatment.  Hence, survival 
rates may be increasing, but the statistics are not yet available to analyze the 
current rates of survival.

What Issues Arise for a Person with Cancer in the Workplace?

There are many workplace issues that arise for people who have cancer.  For many 
people with cancer, being able to keep their job is of paramount importance.  
For many of us, going to work is one of the ways we define ourselves.  Besides 
providing a source of income, going to work helps us focus on things other than 
disease while going through cancer treatment.

Additionally, with the advent of different types of treatment, including ways to 
minimize the side effects, many people are able to continue working while they 
undergo radiation and chemotherapy treatment.  Others will need to take time off 
for treatment, but will be able to return to work once treatment is over.

Also, for people with cancer, being able to maintain health insurance is of 
critical importance.  Therefore, employees also want to keep their jobs, or be 
able to return to their jobs, so they will be able to maintain their health 
insurance.

What Laws Apply to Employees with Cancer?

The Americans with Disabilities Act4
In 1990, Congress passed the Americans with Disabilities Act [ADA]. The ADA is a 
very wide-ranging law.  It prohibits discrimination in all areas of the 
employment process.  An individual is protected in the application process, 
testing, hiring, assignments, medical exams, promotions, layoffs, compensation, 
benefits, and leave time.  It is a civil rights law and was designed to level 
the playing field in the employment arena - so that people would not be denied 
jobs, or the benefits of jobs, simply because they had a disability.

To Whom Does the ADA Apply? 

* Employers --The ADA applies to private employers with 15 or more employees.  
It also applies to employment agencies, labor organizations, and to local and 
county governments.5
* Applicants/Employees-- The ADA provides protection to a "qualified individual 
with a disability."  This is a two-pronged test.  An individual must be both 
disabled and qualified.

An individual with a disability under the ADA is an individual with a physical 
or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity.  The major 
life activity can be, among other things, caring for oneself, walking, talking, 
seeing, breathing, or working.  A person may also have a disability if she has a 
record of an impairment or is regarded as having an impairment.  The impairment 
that substantially impacts a major life function must be severe, not temporary, 
and must produce a permanent or long-term impact.

In determining whether an impairment is substantially limiting, the impairment 
must be looked at in its corrected, or mitigated, state.6  Therefore, one must 
look at the individual's condition at the time of the alleged discrimination, 
including whether the individual has already had surgery and where the 
individual may be in his/her treatment program.  One also must look at the 
medications that the individual may be taking to control the cancer, including a 
look at the side effects of radiation and chemotherapy or any other treatment..

If the person's cancer is completely or substantially controlled through 
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, the person may not have a qualifying 
disability under the ADA because s/he would be unable to show a substantial 
impact on a major life function.  However, the person may be protected under one 
of the other two prongs of the ADA; namely, that s/he may have a history of an 
impairment or the employer may be regarding him/her as having an impairment.

To be entitled to protection, the individual must also be "qualified."  This 
means the individual must be able to perform the essential functions of the job 
with or without a reasonable accommodation.  This can require a determination of 
what are the essential functions of the job versus the marginal functions.  For 
example, if a person is a receptionist and cannot speak on the telephone because 
of the disability and no adaptive equipment is available, this person might not 
be able to perform the essential functions of the job.  If the person is a truck 
driver and must move heavy materials from a loading dock to a truck, that person 
may not be a qualified individual, unless a reasonable accommodation is 
available, because moving the heavy materials may be an essential function of 
the job.

But, suppose the employee with cancer is in a sales position and can handle the 
telephone contacts, the individual appointments, all the paperwork and the 
computer work.  However, this salesperson cannot move boxes of sales materials 
from her office to her car.  This employee may be a qualified individual with a 
disability.  Another person could help move the boxes to her car as a reasonable 
accommodation under the ADA, or moving the boxes may be a marginal function of 
the job.

How Can Reasonable Accommodations Work for Both the Employer and the Employee?

If a person is a qualified individual with a disability, s/he is entitled to a 
reasonable accommodation unless it would be an undue hardship for the employer.  
Some examples of reasonable accommodations include a flexible schedule,  a light 
duty position, an extended period of leave time, or reassignment to a vacant 
position.  Under some court interpretations of the ADA, attendance at a job can 
be an essential function of the job; other courts have held, however, that an 
extended period of paid or unpaid leave time may be a reasonable accommodation.  
Each situation is intended to be assessed on an individualized basis, including 
whether the reasonable accommodation would be an undue hardship for the 
employer.

The ADA does not specifically provide a list of reasonable accommodations - it 
is meant to be a dialogue between the individual and employer and based upon the 
specific type of job and nature, size, and resources of the company involved.  
Additionally, accommodations are only required for known disabilities of the 
individual --- the employer must first be aware that an individual is seeking a 
reasonable accommodation under the ADA.  It is also generally up to the 
individual needing the accommodation to make suggestions to the employer about 
the type of reasonable accommodations s/he is requesting.

What Else Does the ADA Govern?
If a prospective employee is applying for a new job, s/he does not need to 
disclose her medical condition.  S/he can ask for the reasonable accommodation 
after s/he gets the job.  If a person has a visible impairment, the prospective 
employer can ask the potential employee how s/he would perform the job function, 
and ask for a demonstration.  

If a person receives a conditional job offer based upon undergoing a medical 
examination, such an examination must be required of all employees in the same 
job category.  The offer cannot be rescinded unless the medical examination 
indicates that the person cannot perform the essential functions of the job with 
or without a reasonable accommodation.

Finally, any requests for reasonable accommodations under the ADA are to be kept 
confidential.  The request and any information obtained from the individual in 
support of the request should be kept in a file that is kept separate and apart 
from a person's personnel file.

What Other Laws May Apply in the Workplace?

There are other laws that may provide protections to employees in the workplace.  
The ADA can work hand in hand with another law, the Family and Medical Leave 
Act7.  The FMLA provides for a person to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid medical 
leave to care for a seriously ill spouse, parent or child.  It also allows for 
up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for a serious medical condition of the employee.  
Although unpaid (unless the employer requires use of or the employee opts to use 
available annual or sick leave), this is job-protected leave, which means the 
employee returns to the same or an equivalent position.  This law also requires 
the employer to keep an employee's benefits intact.

The FMLA applies to employers with 50 or more employees.  Covered employees must 
have been employed at least a year and have worked a minimum of 1,250 hours in 
that year.  Sometimes, a person will need more than the 12 weeks of unpaid leave 
provided by the FMLA.  In that case, a person may be able to take an extended 
period of leave time as a reasonable accommodation under the ADA.

Additionally, there may be state laws that provide protections equal to or 
greater than the ADA or FMLA.  Each employer should review the applicable state 
laws to determine the employer and employee's rights and responsibilities under 
these laws.

Working Together

Cancer can be a life-altering experience, for the person with cancer and also 
for those impacted by the disease, including family, friends, employers and co-
workers.  By communicating with each other and working together, employers and 
employees can seek ways in which employees can maintain their employment status 
and employers can still have positive business results.

Resources

ADA Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center Hotline - 
(800)949-4232 (Voice/TTY).

American Cancer Society
1-800-ACS-2345
http://www.cancer.org/

Cancer Legal Resource Center,
Western Law Center for Disability Rights
919 South Albany Street
Los Angeles, CA 90015-1211
Phone: (213) 736-1455
Fax: (213) 736-1428
TTY: (213) 736-8310
http://wlcdr.everybody.org/special-programs/cancer.mason

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 1801 L Street, NW, Washington, DC 
20507, Technical Assistance - (800) 669-4000 (voice); (800) 800-3302 (TTY).  
Publications - (800) 666-EEOC (Voice)/(800) 800-3302 (TTY).  For on-line 
information, go to www.eeoc.gov.

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices and workplace 
accommodations for persons with disabilities edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, 
Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, Program on Employment and Disability, School of 
Industrial and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University. It was 
written in August 2001 by Barbara Ullman Schwerin, Esq., Director, Cancer Legal 
Resource Center, a joint program of the Western Law Center for Disability Rights 
and Loyola Law School, Los Angeles, CA.  Research assistance was provided by 
Daniel Chang, Loyola Law School, J.D. anticipated 2003.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. Department of 
Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research as a 
National Materials Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of new 
brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on Employment and Disability, 
the Pacific Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and other 
supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also conducting employment policy and 
practices research, examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been funded by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research  (Grant #H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on Employment of 
Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be found at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports relating to employment practices 
and policies on disability civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment and Disability, 
Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 
(Voice), 607/255-2891 (TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from the ADA Technical Assistance Program and 
Regional Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 
(voice/TTY), www.adata.org.

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment and Disability, School 
of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension Division, Cornell University, and 
funded by a grant from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
and Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those 
of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's 
interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 
1630), Technical Assistance Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement 
Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide information, materials, and technical 
assistance to individuals and entities that are covered by the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, and/or 
technical assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, and are neither a 
determination of your legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor 
binding on any agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued enforcement guidance 
which provides additional clarification of various elements of the Title I 
provisions under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance documents are available for 
viewing and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 

Notes:
1 Cancer Facts and Figures 2001, page 2, American Cancer Society, Inc. 2001.
2 Cancer Facts and Figures 2001, page 2, American Cancer Society, Inc. 2001.
3 Cancer Facts and Figures 2001, pages 3-4, American Cancer Society, Inc. 2001.
4 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq. (2001); 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630 et seq (2001).
5 While a claimant can no longer bring suit for money damages against state 
governments under the ADA [Board of Trustees of University of Alabama v. 
Garrett, 51 U.S. 356 (2001)], many states have pending legislation that would 
make that state liable for violations of the ADA.  State employers should verify 
current state legislation to determine if they may be liable for claims of ADA 
violations.
6 Sutton v. United Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471 (1999).
7 29 U.S.C.A §§2601-2615 (2001).

Your Employees and Cancer - Working Together
August 2001CORNELL UNIVERSITY
