Policies and Programs Affecting the Employment of People with Disabilities

Prepared by:
Cornell University
The Lewin Group

Gina A. Livermore
Mark W. Nowak
David C. Wittenburg

August 2000

For more information on the Cornell RRTC contact:
Susanne Bruyère, Ph.D.
Project Director
Cornell University
106 ILR Extension Building
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
Tel     (607) 255-7727
Fax     (607) 255-2763
TDD   (607) 255-2891
email  smb23@cornell.edu
web   www.ilr.cornell.edu/rrtc

Send comments on paper to:
Gina Livermore, Ph.D.
Assistant Director
Cornell Center for Policy Research
1779 Massachusetts Ave, NW Suite 820
Washington, DC 20036
Tel 202-518-3388
Fax 202-518-3352
email gal23@cornell.edu

Asterisk (*) indicates endnote, which are listed at the end of the paper.

I. INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this brief is to summarize the wide range of federal programs and 
government policies that influence the employment and program participation 
decisions of people with disabilities and current research initiatives related 
to these programs and policies. The brief is organized by the following types of 
programs, policies, and initiatives: 
- federal programs that provide cash assistance, in-kind transfers (e.g., health 
insurance) and education, training, and rehabilitation support based on 
disability status and/or other characteristics (e.g., family structure);  
- federal tax policies that provide credits either directly to individuals with 
disabilities or to employers as an incentive to hire a person with a disability; 
- other employment-related programs and public policies that provide 
accommodation support and work incentives for people with disabilities; 
- recent policy changes that affect people with disabilities; and 
- some of the current research initiatives related to federal programs, tax 
policies, other employment programs and policies, and recent policy changes.  
We conclude with a summary of our program, policy, and research scan.  
This publication is based on The Economics of Policies and Programs Affecting 
the Employment of People with Disabilities, which provides a more comprehensive 
review of the policies and programs discussed here (as well as others) and 
analyzes the employment effects of these policies and programs within an 
economic framework.

II. GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE AND SUPPORT PROGRAMS

A. Cash Assistance Programs for People with Disabilities
A number of cash assistance programs exist to provide either temporary or 
permanent benefits to people who have experienced losses of income due to 
disabling physical or mental health conditions.  These programs vary regarding 
eligibility as well as the extent to which they replace pre-disability earnings, 
and therefore vary in how, and to what extent, they influence the employment 
decisions of beneficiaries (Livermore, et al., 2000).  The major programs 
include:   

- Social Security Disability Insurance (DI). The purpose of the DI program is to 
replace a portion of lost income due to a worker's physical or mental 
disability.  To qualify, an individual must meet the Social Security 
Administration's (SSA) definition of disability and be insured for disability 
through prior work experiences.  To satisfy the disability criterion, an 
individual must (1) have a medically determined disability expected to last at 
least 12 months or result in death and (2) be unable to engage in substantial 
gainful activity (SGA).*1  An individual is insured for disability if he or she 
has worked in a job covered by Social Security for a specified number of 
quarters (which varies by age).  There is a five-month waiting period for 
benefits after the onset of a disability for those who are determined eligible 
for DI.  DI beneficiaries are also eligible for Medicare coverage (discussed 
below) after a two-year waiting period from receipt of initial benefits. While 
the DI program includes several provisions that allow beneficiaries to maintain 
their eligibility for cash and/or Medicare benefits if they return to work, 
beneficiaries can lose DI and Medicare eligibility if earnings rise above the 
SGA level. 
- Supplemental Security Income (SSI). The federal SSI program provides basic 
monthly income to people age 65 and older, to the blind, or to people of any age 
who meet SSA's definition of disability. Children under age 18 can qualify under 
certain child specific disability and income eligibility criteria.  The major 
eligibility difference between the adult SSI and DI programs is that a person 
must satisfy a means and asset test to qualify for SSI benefits, whereas under 
DI they must meet certain past work history conditions.*2  In addition, most SSI 
recipients are immediately eligible for Medicaid benefits (discussed below). 
Finally, SSI benefits are generally much lower than average DI benefits ($388 
vs. $681 in December 1999). While the SSI program includes several provisions 
that allow recipients to maintain their eligibility for cash and/or Medicaid 
benefits if they return to work, they can lose a portion or all of their SSI 
benefit levels if they become employed and have earnings above a certain 
thresholds.
- Workers' Compensation (WC).  WC programs provide cash benefits, medical care, 
and rehabilitation services for workers who suffer work-related injuries and 
diseases, and to some dependents of workers. WC programs are subject to certain 
state and federal regulations, though there is substantial variation in WC 
eligibility rules and benefits across states.  Employers provide the funding for 
WC programs, and state-regulated insurance companies, employers who self-insure, 
or special state insurance funds distribute the benefits. WC benefit levels vary 
by state, but temporary or permanent total disability benefits are commonly set 
at two-thirds weekly earnings up to some maximum.  Unlike SSI or DI, WC payments 
are available for partial disabilities (either temporary or permanent).  It is 
important to note that, under certain conditions, workers with disabilities can 
qualify for both WC and DI.  In general, WC payments are discontinued upon 
returning to work. 
- Veterans Administration Programs.  The Veterans Administration provides 
disability compensation to veterans who are discharged honorably and who have 
experienced or aggravated a disabling injury or disease during active military 
service. Veterans who have non-service related disabilities, or who are age 65 
or older, are also eligible to receive a veteran's pension. 
Several other state, employer, and individual programs also provide benefits to 
cover a loss of income due to disability.  For example, Private Disability 
Insurance (PDI) is an employer sponsored or an individually purchased benefit 
that usually replaces 60 percent of earnings in case of a long-term 
disability.*3 Five states have Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI) programs 
that provide cash benefits to certain workers to ensure against wage loss when 
an individual cannot work because of sickness or injury not caused by his/her 
job.*4  The Black Lung benefit program, which is administered by the Department 
of Labor, provides disability benefits to miners and their families.  Finally, 
some states have General Assistance (GA) programs that provide temporary 
benefits to adults with disabilities.  

B. Other Cash Assistance Programs
In addition to participating in programs designed specifically to assist people 
with disabilities, people with disabilities might choose also to participate in 
other (non-disability) programs relevant to other circumstances and/or 
background characteristics.  For example, some people with disabilities might 
apply to non-disability cash assistance programs because (1) they only need 
temporary assistance; (2) their limitation is not severe enough to satisfy the 
strict disability definitions of the above programs; and/or (3) they might be 
unaware or unwilling to apply for one of the aforementioned disability programs.
Unlike most of the disability programs described above, which provide long-term 
or permanent cash assistance, these other programs are designed to provide 
temporary cash assistance.  The major programs include:

- Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). TANF is a federal-state 
program that provides cash benefits to low-income families with children. TANF 
is a state block grant program.  Under TANF, states have flexibility to 
determine eligibility requirements and benefit levels, but benefits are subject 
to federal time limits and work requirements.*5  The federal time limit is five 
years, though states can choose a shorter limit.  Researcher have noted that 
TANF recipients with disabilities have a strong incentive to apply for SSI 
benefits because SSI payments are generally larger than those from TANF and SSI 
benefits are not time-limited.*6
- Unemployment Insurance (UI). UI is a federal-state program that provides 
temporary and partial wage replacement to involuntarily unemployed workers who 
were recently employed. While UI eligibility rules vary across states, in 
general all workers must satisfy certain "monetary and non-monetary eligibility" 
requirements to be eligible for a weekly check.  In general, to satisfy these 
requirements a worker must have: (1) worked in UI-covered employment (which 
includes most wage and salary jobs); (2) earned enough in his or her base years 
to qualify for UI; and (3) was not terminated for cause. Employers generally pay 
unemployment taxes to cover the costs of unemployment benefits, which is 
deposited in a state UI trust fund (monitored by the Department of Labor).  

C. In-Kind Support
Many participants in disability and other cash transfer programs also receive 
in-kind support from various sources.  In-kind supports include any payments 
made to an individual in the form of a commodity or service.  These supports, 
particularly health care coverage, can be very valuable to people with 
disabilities.  The major in-kind support programs include:

- Medicare.  Medicare is a national health insurance program that provides 
coverage to eligible persons over age 65 and certain populations of people with 
disabilities (most notably, DI beneficiaries).  Medicare consists of the 
Hospital Insurance program (Part A) and Supplementary Medical Insurance Program 
(Part B).  DI beneficiaries are automatically eligible for Part A (after a two-
year waiting period).  Part A provides coverage for inpatient hospital care, 
skilled nursing facility care, home health care, and hospice care.  Part B, 
which is voluntary (i.e., those eligible must pay a premium to participate), 
provides coverage for doctor services, other medical and health services (e.g. 
X-ray and other therapy) and home health services.  
- Medicaid.  Medicaid is a federal-state matching entitlement program that 
provides a very important source of health benefits to low-income children and 
pregnant women, adults in families with dependent children, low-income persons 
with disabilities, and low-income elderly persons.  Many individuals become 
eligible for Medicaid through their participation in transfer programs, such as 
SSI and TANF, though federal legislation in the early nineties expanded coverage 
to all children whose family income was below 100 percent of the federal poverty 
level.  Optional and state-only programs significantly expand coverage to people 
with disabilities in some states.  As discussed in more detail below, Congress 
recently enacted changes in the Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement 
Act of 1999 that expands state options in the future to provide Medicaid 
coverage to people with disabilities. 
- Food Stamps.  The Federal Food Stamp program, which is administered by the 
Agriculture Department's Food and Nutrition Service, provides benefits to 
increase the food purchasing power of eligible low-income households.  
Specifically, Food Stamp benefits make up the difference between a participating 
household's expected contribution to its food costs and an amount judged to be 
sufficient to buy a nutritionally adequate low-cost diet.  Benefits are 
available to most households that meet federal eligibility tests for limited 
monthly income and liquid assets. 
- Assistive Devices and Technologies (AT). Several public policies and private 
funding sources either promote the (1) public accessibility or (2) individual 
use of AT devices.*7 An assistive technology (AT) device is "any item, piece of 
equipment, or product system...used to increase, maintain, or improve functional 
capabilities of individuals with disabilities."*8 Most AT devices help people 
with certain disabilities process information or by simplifying necessary work 
routines. Examples of AT include wheelchair lifts and telecommunication devices.
- Personal Assistance Services (PAS). Similar to AT, PAS is financed through 
both public programs and private sources (e.g., personal funding or employer 
accommodations).  Publicly-financed programs (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid) that 
deliver PAS are typically designed and implemented at the state level, with 
substantial variability regarding service provisions and eligibility 
restrictions among programs.*9  Examples of PAS include help from another person 
to accomplish with daily activities (e.g., bathing, cleaning, preparing meals), 
communication, transportation, and help completing job-related tasks. 
- Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities. The Supportive Housing for 
Persons with Disabilities program, administered by the Department of Housing and 
Urban Development, provides interest-free capital advances to nonprofit 
organizations that build, rehabilitate, or purchase rental housing to be used as 
supportive housing for persons with disabilities.  The advance is interest free 
and does not have to be repaid as long as the housing remains available for very 
low-income persons with disabilities for at least 40 years.
- Energy and Housing Assistance Programs. Two programs provide benefits that 
reduce the costs of housing and energy. The Low-Income Home Energy Assistance 
Program (LIHEAP), which is administered by the Administration for Children and 
Families within the Department of Health and Human services, makes grants 
available to states and other jurisdictions to help eligible households meet the 
costs of home energy. The Housing Choice Voucher program, administered by the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, provides housing assistance 
payments to participating owners on behalf of eligible tenants. 

D. Education, Training, and Rehabilitation
Multiple education, training, and rehabilitation programs provide support to 
help individuals become employed and self-sufficient.  Unlike the programs 
described above that provide cash or in-kind support, the education, training 
and rehabilitation programs primarily provide service support that focus on 
integrating people with disabilities into the labor market.  Some of the major 
programs and policies include:

- Vocational Rehabilitation (VR). VR is a nationwide federal-state program that 
provides medical, therapeutic, counseling, education, training, work-related 
placement assistance, and other services.  VR was established to provide the 
services and supports that a person might need to overcome a barrier to 
employment. People enter the VR system in a variety of ways.*10  To be eligible 
for state VR services, a participant must meet certain criteria.  First, he or 
she must have a physical or mental impairment that results in a substantial 
barrier to employment. Second, he or she must be able to benefit from VR 
services.  Finally, he or she must be eventually able to achieve an employment 
outcome.  State VR agencies can deny benefits if they can show that a person 
cannot benefit from the services.  To make determinations, state VR agencies use 
existing data, such as medical reports, SSA records, and education records and, 
to the extent existing data is insufficient to determine eligibility, an 
assessment by the VR agency.  While the state VR programs are the largest 
providers of rehabilitation services, there are also several other private VR 
programs that provide services to certain populations of people with 
disabilities.  
- Education Programs and Policies. Under the Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act (IDEA), states are required to provide free appropriate public 
education for students with disabilities at the elementary and secondary level.  
Schools are required to create Individual Education Programs (IEPs) to help 
assist youth with disabilities obtain important services at no additional cost 
to their families.  IEPs identify available services and include plans for post-
secondary transitions from school to work for secondary-school youth with 
disabilities.  Most education programs for youth with disabilities also receive 
support from various other state and federal programs, particularly Medicaid, as 
well as grants from the US Department of Education, Office of Special Education 
(OSEP).
- Other Training Programs.  People with disabilities who do not immediately 
contact the VR, SSI or TANF systems might gain access to training and employment 
services through a variety of other programs that receive state and federal 
funding. For example State Workforce Development Systems, organized under the 
Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (WIA), require states to develop workforce 
development plans that describe the state's plan for meeting the needs of 
individuals with disabilities and ensuring nondiscrimination and equal 
opportunity.  The Projects with Industry Program (PWI), created by the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and administered by the U.S. Department of Education, 
creates partnerships among business, industry, labor, and the rehabilitation 
community to assist in providing employment opportunities for people with 
disabilities. Finally, Independent Living Programs provide grants to states and 
nonprofit organizations to establish and support centers for independent living, 
which provide a number of employment-related services, including skills 
training.

III. FEDERAL TAX POLICIES
The U.S. tax code includes several provisions that provide work incentives for 
people with disabilities.  Individuals can take advantage of these incentives by 
claiming exemptions on payroll taxes and/or by taking the exemption at the end 
of the year when filing income tax returns.  The major incentives include: 

- Itemized Deduction of Impairment-Related Work Expenses (IRWE). Any worker with 
a limitation may deduct impairment-related work expenses (IRWE) from his or her 
taxable income.  Deductible expenses include those necessary for the 
satisfactory completion of work, those for goods and services not required or 
used in personal activities, and those not specifically covered by other tax 
laws. 
- Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is 
targeted to low-wage earners, supplementing the earnings of such workers through 
a refundable income tax credit. The income limits that determine eligibility for 
this credit are more generous for people with children.*11 
- Income Exemption of Flexible Health Care Spending Accounts. The Income 
Exemption of Flexible Health Care Spending Accounts allows individuals to 
exclude health care expenses from taxable income, up to a maximum benefit of 
$3,600 per year. These accounts may be used to pay for most health care 
expenditures.
The government also provides tax incentives for businesses to hire people with 
disabilities. The general purpose of most of these taxes is to lower the cost of 
employing people with disabilities.  For example, some tax incentives might 
offset higher costs associated with accommodating a person with a disability in 
the workplace.  The major business tax incentives include:
- Section 190 Deduction. The Section 190 Deduction, also called the Deduction of 
Costs of Removing Architectural or Transportation Barriers to the Disabled or 
Elderly, allows businesses to deduct expenses incurred while removing from the 
premises physical barriers to persons with disabilities. 
- Section 44 Credit. The Section 44 Credit, also known as the Disabled Access 
Credit, is a non-refundable tax credit for small businesses that pay or incur 
expenses to provide access to persons with disabilities, such as for compliance 
with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
- The Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) and Welfare to Work Credit. The Work 
Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC), enacted in August 1996, grants employers a tax 
credit equal to 35 percent of the wages of certain targeted groups, including 
persons with physical or mental disabilities.*12

IV. OTHER EMPLOYMENT-RELATED PROGRAMS AND POLICY INITIATIVES
Many people with disabilities receive support from other employment related 
programs and policies that encourage employment and equal access to services by 
either prohibiting discrimination and/or by creating networks of supports. These 
programs and policies include:

- Americans with Disabilities Act.  The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 
(ADA) is regarded as one of the most important legislative initiatives that 
protects people with disabilities from discrimination  This Act prohibits job-
related discrimination against people with disabilities, and requires that 
reasonable accommodations be provided by employers for people with disabilities. 
The Act also prohibits state and local governments from discriminating against 
people with disabilities in employment practices, and in excluding people with 
disabilities from participating in or receiving benefits of programs, services 
or activities. The Act requires that all public and private transportation 
services be accessible to all people, including public accommodations (such as 
restaurants, movie theaters, museums, malls, etc.) Finally, the Act requires 
telecommunication carriers to increase availability of interstate and intrastate 
telecommunications relay services. 
- Job Accommodation Network. The Job Accommodation Network (JAN), a service of 
the President's Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities, is a toll-
free information and referral service providing information on job 
accommodation, employers' responsibilities under the ADA, and on technical 
assistance, funding, education, and services related to the employment of people 
with disabilities.
-  Project ABLE (Able Beneficiaries Link to Employers). Project ABLE is a 
national resume bank that provides employers an easily accessible applicant pool 
of qualified job-ready individuals who are interested in working. The resume 
bank operates through the joint efforts of the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM), SSA, Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA), the VA, and state VR 
agencies. The goal is to provide employers access to quality human resources, 
and training and employment services to eligible people with disabilities.

V. RECENT POLICY INITIATIVES
In recent years, several policy initiatives have directly modified or otherwise 
affected the programs and policies discussed in the previous sections.  These 
changes either affect program eligibility, program benefits, and/or the 
availability of support to people with disabilities.  The initiatives include:

- 1999 Ticket- to Work and Work Incentive Improvement Act (TWWIIA). TWWIIA 
includes five provisions - Ticket to Work and Self-Sufficiency Program, 
Expansion of Health Insurance Eligibility, Elimination of Other Work 
Disincentives, Demonstration Project on Change in DI Benefits Schedule, and Work 
Incentives Outreach Program - that feature work incentives to people with 
disabilities. The Ticket to Work and Self-Sufficiency Program will provide 
eligible DI beneficiaries with a voucher (i.e. ticket) to obtain VR or 
employment services.  The Expansion of Health Insurance provisions are intended 
to reduce the cost of health care to people with disabilities who work.  
Specifically, these provisions loosen restrictions on states regarding who is 
eligible to buy into the Medicaid program, and provide for the continuation of 
Medicare coverage for individuals formerly receiving DI benefits.*13  The 
Elimination of Other Work Disincentives provisions institute limitations on 
conducting continuing disability reviews (CDRs) for individuals using a Ticket 
to Work and it prohibits the use of work activity as a basis for review of an 
individual's disability status. The Demonstration Project on Change in DI 
Benefits Schedule provisions grants SSA the authority to evaluate the effects 
changing the working eligibility rules for DI beneficiaries.*14  Finally, the 
Work Incentive Outreach Program provisions directs SSA to establish a community-
based work incentive planning and assistance program, for the purpose of 
providing accurate information related to work incentives to beneficiaries with 
disabilities.*15
- 1997 Balanced Budget Act. Section 4733 of the Balanced Budget Act (BBA) 
expands state options to provide Medicaid for working people with disabilities 
by creating a new optional eligibility category.  Specifically, this legislation 
allows states to provide health insurance to individuals with incomes up to 250 
percent of the federal poverty level.*16 While SSI eligibility is not a 
requirement for this provision, states must make a disability determination to 
expand coverage to those not enrolled in SSI.
- 1998 Workforce Investment Act.  Title I of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) 
provides assistance to states interested in establishing statewide and local 
workforce investment systems to increase employment, retention and earnings of 
participants. The objectives of the WIA include improving the quality of the 
workforce to sustain economic growth, improving productivity and 
competitiveness, and reducing dependency on welfare. Under the WIA, states are 
required to write workforce development plans describing how the state plans to 
meet the needs of major customer groups, including individuals with 
disabilities, and show how the plans will ensure nondiscrimination and equal 
opportunity.  Of particular importance for people with disabilities is that WIA 
mandates that one-stop systems be easily accessible to all Americans. All adults 
are eligible for core services and youth enrolled in school are eligible for 
certain services if they meet certain state criteria for employment, income, 
and/or disability.*17 
- Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  The 
objective of The Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities, established in March 1998, is to create a coordinated and 
consistent national policy to bring adults with disabilities into productive 
employment at a rate close to that of the general adult population.  The Task 
Force will develop and recommend to the President a coordinated set of policies 
to reduce employment barriers for people with disabilities.*18
- Social Security Administration (SSA) and Rehabilitation Services 
Administration (RSA) State Partnership Initiatives.  In 1998, SSA and RSA 
initiated several projects designed to improve services and programming for 
people with disabilities as they attempt to enter or reenter the workforce. Both 
agencies have awarded cooperative agreements to 17 states.  Most of these grants 
aim to make it easier for people with disabilities to use existing services, via 
service integration or counseling. Most also include some form of continued 
health insurance coverage.
- Substantial Gainful Activity (SGA) Definition Increase to $700.  In July 1999, 
the definition of SGA was raised from $500 to $700 of earned income per month. 
The SGA threshold, the amount of income that an individual with a disability may 
earn without losing disability benefits, provides a significant incentive to 
work only up to the income level of the threshold. This adjustment is the first 
of its kind since 1990, reflecting recent growth in average wages. 
- Department of Labor Office on Disability Policy, Evaluation, and Technical 
Assistance.  The U.S. Department of Labor provides funding for a new Office on 
Disability Policy, Evaluation, and Technical Assistance, which will be charged 
with increasing the employment rate of people with disabilities.  The office 
will guarantee that laws enforced by the department are evaluated to identify 
and remove any existing barriers for people with disabilities.  Moreover, the 
office will confirm that all services of the new system of one-stop centers, 
established by the Workforce Investment Act, are accessible to people with 
disabilities.

VI. RESEARCH INITIATIVES
Several government agencies, including the SSA, the Department of Education, and 
the Department of Health and Human Services, are sponsoring research efforts to 
better understand the factors that promote employment and economic independence 
among people with disabilities.  Many of these efforts are examining the 
interaction of work with one or more of the programs described above.  The major 
initiatives include:

- National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) 
Rehabilitation Research and Training Centers (RRTCs) on Employment. NIDRR 
recently established several new RRTCs aimed at improving employment outcomes of 
people with disabilities. All centers will conduct research, training, technical 
assistance, and dissemination activities.  Examples of the topics addressed by 
the centers include issues specific to American Indians, training of persons 
with long-term mental illness, community rehabilitation programs to improve 
employment outcomes, economic research on employment policy for people with 
disabilities, educational supports, maintaining the employment status and 
addressing the personal adjustment needs of individuals who are hard of hearing 
or late deafened, personal assistance services (PAS), state systems and 
employment outcomes, workforce investment and employment policy for people with 
disabilities, and workplace supports.
- SSA National Study of Health and Activity (NSHA). The National Study of Health 
and Activity (NSHA), sponsored by SSA, is a national disability study of the 
American working-age population (aged 18-69). A pilot study will begin in 2000 
and the main study, starting about a year later, will result in about 10,000 
completed interviews for a nationally-representative sample.  The study will 
provide detailed information on individuals who may satisfy SSA's disability 
criterion for benefits.  
- SSA Disability Research Institute. SSA is funding a cooperative agreement to 
create a Disability Research Institute (DRI) to address the need for more 
extensive research for policymakers, including information on SSA disability 
programs and VR services.  The DRI is a university-based, multi-disciplinary 
center that will utilize a network of scholars from a variety of institutions. 
- SSA Demonstration on the Treatment of Affective Disorders. SSA is designing a 
demonstration that will test the effectiveness of providing better access to 
quality treatments for affective disorders to DI beneficiaries whose primary 
reason for impairment is an affective disorder. Persons with affective disorders 
represent one of the fastest growing cohorts on the disability rolls, 
representing one in nine DI beneficiaries. The rationale behind the 
demonstration is that appropriate treatment for such disorders can be effective 
in anywhere from 60 to 80 percent of cases. This, combined with the fact that 
many beneficiaries lack access to adequate treatment (because of lack of health 
insurance, and high co-pays and deductibles and no prescription drug coverage 
under Medicare), suggests that providing access to treatment will result in 
improved health status of DI beneficiaries with affective disorders, and, in 
turn, lead to increased labor force participation and self-sufficiency. The 
demonstration is scheduled to begin around the end of fiscal year 2000 and will 
last for five years. 
- ASPE Study of Employment Supports Used by Working People with Disabilities. 
This project will provide information to federal agencies, states, social 
service agencies, advocates for people with disabilities, and consumers with 
disabilities to develop and inform policies that will promote the employment of 
people with significant disabilities. The focus of this study is to identify, 
through interviews and focus groups, the supports and other factors that have 
been instrumental in allowing individuals with significant disabilities to 
become successfully employed.

VII. SUMMARY
We provide a summary of our policy scan in the Appendix.  This appendix provides 
a brief description and highlights the target population for each of the 
programs, policies, and research initiatives summarized above.
Despite the large number of programs and policies directed towards people with 
disabilities, there is no system that provides a universal source of benefits 
and services to this population.  Rather, several government agencies administer 
programs that have their own eligibility rules.  Some of these programs focus on 
returning people with disabilities to work, while others focus on providing 
income and other support not related to work.  In many cases, people with 
disabilities are eligible for benefits and services from multiple programs.  
Consequently, many people with disabilities who (might) participate in these 
programs face complex incentives in deciding whether to enter the labor market.
It is important to note that this brief does not highlight the complex 
interactions that exist across programs and, more importantly, the potential 
impacts of these programs (and program interactions) on economic decisions of 
people with disabilities.  Readers interested in these more complex economic 
consequences of these programs and policies should refer to Livermore, et al. 
(2000).  In that report, we highlight program work incentives and disincentives, 
program overlaps (e.g., Supplemental Security Income and Medicaid) and discuss 
the potential impact of these programs (and their overlaps with other programs) 
on the economic decisions of people with disabilities.  This larger report 
should serve as a useful guide for researchers and policy makers interested in 
understanding and evaluating the economic consequences for people with 
disabilities of these programs and policies.

Appendix:
Public Programs and Policies Affecting the Employment of People with 
Disabilities

Public Income Support Programs Targeting People with Disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Social Security Disability Insurance (DI)
DESCRIPTION
Program to insure workers against loss of income due to disability.  Payments 
are based on individuals' lifetime average earnings covered by Social Security.
TARGET POPULATION

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
DESCRIPTION
Means-tested program to provide monthly cash income to people age 65 and older 
and those under 65 who are blind or disabled.
TARGET POPULATION
People age 65 and older, blind and people with disabilities of any age with 
limited income

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Workers' Compensation (WC)
DESCRIPTION
Cash payments, rehabilitation services and medical benefits provided by 
employers to workers who suffer work-related injuries or diseases.
TARGET POPULATION
People who suffer work-related injuries and diseases

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Veterans Administration Programs
DESCRIPTION
Programs including disability compensation payments and veterans' pensions that 
provide payments to people aged 65 or older or less than 65 and disabled who 
served in the military.
TARGET POPULATION
Veterans of military service that are over 65 or disabled

Other Public  Income Support Programs

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
DESCRIPTION
Program that provides time-limited cash benefits to needy families with 
children.

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Unemployment Insurance
DESCRIPTION
Provides temporary benefits to workers who have recently lost their jobs, based 
upon their earnings prior to unemployment.
TARGET POPULATION
Recently unemployed workers

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Medicare
DESCRIPTION
Public health insurance program for individuals age 65 and over and persons with 
disabilities. The program provides both hospital coverage (Part A) and 
supplementary medical insurance (Part B).
TARGET POPULATION
People age 65 and older, current/former DI beneficiaries

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Medicaid
DESCRIPTION
Federal-state matching entitlement program that provides medical assistance 
primarily to low-income and otherwise needy individuals, including persons with 
disabilities. Eligibility may be linked to SSI or TANF.
TARGET POPULATION
Low-income children and pregnant women, adults in families with dependent 
children, people with disabilities, and the elderly

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Assistive Technology Act of 1998
DESCRIPTION
Provides grants to states that may be used to provide assistive technology 
devices to individuals, as well as to increase public awareness of available 
assistive technology.
TARGET POPULATION
People with disabilities in need of assistive technology devices 

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Personal Assistance Services (PAS)
DESCRIPTION
Services performed by a person to assist an individual with disabilities to 
accomplish the basic activities of daily living (ADLs), including mobility, 
eating, and dressing. Other PAS might include assistance with communication, 
transportation, and help completing job-related tasks.
TARGET POPULATION
People with disabilities in need of help with activities of daily living (ADLs).

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Food Stamps
DESCRIPTION
Increase the food purchasing power of low-income households by subsidizing food 
purchases through coupons that can be used like cash at the grocery store.
TARGET POPULATION
Low-income households

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
The Housing Choice Voucher Program
DESCRIPTION
Combines the Section 8 Voucher and Section 8 Certificate programs, providing 
housing assistance payments to participating owners on behalf of eligible 
tenants.
TARGET POPULATION
Low-income households

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities
DESCRIPTION
Provides interest-free capital advances to nonprofit organizations to build, 
rehabilitate, or purchase rental housing to be used as supportive housing for 
persons with disabilities.
TARGET POPULATION
Persons with physical or mental disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
DESCRIPTION
Makes grants available to states and other jurisdictions to assist eligible 
households to meet the costs of home energy.
TARGET POPULATION
Low-income households

Education, Training,  and Rehabilitation

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
DESCRIPTION
Requires states to provide free and appropriate public education for students 
with disabilities at the elementary and secondary level.

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
State Vocational Rehabilitation
DESCRIPTION
A federal-state program intended to help people with physical and mental 
impairments to work by providing services including medical and therapeutic 
services, counseling, education, training, and job placement assistance.
TARGET POPULATION
Adults with physical or mental impairments who are able to benefit from VR 
services

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Veteran Vocational Rehabilitation
DESCRIPTION
A program similar to the state VR program that provides services exclusively to 
veterans.
TARGET POPULATION
Veterans with service-related disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
State Workforce Development Systems (Workforce Investment Act of 1998)
DESCRIPTION
Program mandated by the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 that requires states to 
integrate job training, adult education and literacy, and VR programs into a 
one-stop delivery system.
TARGET POPULATION
All adults, youth who meet state-determined criteria

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Projects with Industry Program (PWI)
DESCRIPTION
Program that facilitates job placement for people with disabilities emphasizing 
job training in work settings. Encourages partnerships among business, industry, 
labor, and the rehabilitation community. 
TARGET POPULATION
Adults with disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Independent Living Programs
DESCRIPTION
Provides grants to states and nonprofit organizations to establish support 
centers for independent living, which provide independent living skills 
training, peer counseling, community outreach and employment services.
TARGET POPULATION
People with significant disabilities

Tax Policies

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Income Exemption of Flexible Health Care Spending Accounts
DESCRIPTION
A benefit that may be offered by employers and that allows employees to exclude 
up to $3,600 per year of their health care expenses from their taxable income.

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Itemized Deduction of Impairment-Related Work Expenses( IRWEs)
DESCRIPTION
Allows people with disabilities who work to deduct the cost of impairment 
related work expenses (IRWE) from their taxable income. 
TARGET POPULATION
Persons with physical or mental disabilities that limit ability to work

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)
DESCRIPTION
Supplements the earnings of low-income workers by providing them with a 
refundable income tax credit. 
TARGET POPULATION
Low-income individuals

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Section 190 Tax Deduction
DESCRIPTION
Allows businesses to deduct expenses related to removing barriers or impediments 
to persons with disabilities from their places of business.
TARGET POPULATION
All businesses

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Section 44 Tax Credit
DESCRIPTION
Tax credit intended to help cover the expenses incurred by small businesses to 
provide access to people with disabilities.
TARGET POPULATION
Small businesses

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Work Opportunity Tax Credit
DESCRIPTION
Provides employers a tax credit equal to 35% of the wages of certain groups, 
including people with disabilities.
TARGET POPULATION
Employers of targeted groups

Other Employment-Related Programs and Policies for People with Disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
DESCRIPTION
Prohibits job-related discrimination against people with disabilities and 
requires employers to provide "reasonable accommodations," which may include 
personal assistance services or assistive technology devices.

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Job Accommodation Network (JAN)
DESCRIPTION
A service of the President's Committee on Employment of People with 
Disabilities, JAN is a toll-free information and referral service that provides 
information on job accommodation, employers' responsibilities under the ADA, and 
on technical assistance, funding, education, and services related to the 
employment of people with disabilities.  
TARGET POPULATION
All interested persons and employers

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Project Able
DESCRIPTION
Resume bank established specifically to match jobs to appropriately qualified 
people with disabilities.
TARGET POPULATION
Adults with disabilities who are "job-ready"

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Balanced Budget Act of 1997
DESCRIPTION
Gives states the option of allowing people with disabilities with incomes of up 
to 250% of the federal poverty standard to buy-in to Medicaid if they are not 
otherwise eligible.
TARGET POPULATION
Low-income workers with disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities
DESCRIPTION
Task force instituted to create a coordinated national policy to increase the 
employment of people with disabilities.
TARGET POPULATION
All people with disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Workforce Investment Act of 1998
DESCRIPTION
States are required to develop workforce development plans that describe how the 
state will meet the needs of major customer groups, including individuals with 
disabilities, and show how the plans will ensure nondiscrimination and equal 
opportunity. 
TARGET POPULATION
Major customer groups, including people with disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Social Security Administration (SSA) and Rehabilitation Services Administration  
(RSA) State Partnership Initiatives
DESCRIPTION
Grants to states to improve coordination of services and programming for people 
with disabilities preparing to enter (or reenter) the workforce. 
TARGET POPULATION
Adults with disabilities (mainly SSI and DI)

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Substantial Gainful Activity (SGA) Increase to $700
DESCRIPTION
The change in the definition of substantial gainful activity from $500 to $700 
is intended to facilitate work for DI/SSI beneficiaries by reducing the chance 
that return-to-work efforts will cause the immediate loss of cash benefits.
TARGET POPULATION
SSI and DI beneficiaries

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement Act of 1999 (TWWIIA)
DESCRIPTION
The Act is intended to reduce work disincentives related to the SSI and DI 
programs. Provisions include the ticket to work program, which provides vouchers 
for rehabilitation and employment services, expanded Medicaid and Medicare 
eligibility, outreach to disseminate accurate information about work provisions, 
demonstrations to study the effect of changing the DI benefits schedule, and the 
elimination of other work disincentives.
TARGET POPULATION
Primarily DI and SSI beneficiaries with disabilities, and other low-income 
people with disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Department of Labor Office on Disability Policy, Evaluation, and Technical 
Assistance
DESCRIPTION
Office charged with increasing the employment rate of people with disabilities. 
The Office will be headed by an assistant secretary and will absorb the 
President's Committee on the Employment of People with Disabilities.
TARGET POPULATION
All people with disabilities

Research Initiatives

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
National Institute of Disability Rehabilitation and Research (NIDRR) 
Rehabilitation Research and Training Centers (RRTC) on Employment 
DESCRIPTION
The National Institute of Disability Rehabilitation and Research sponsors a 
number of rehabilitation research and training centers (RRTCs) that conduct 
research and training in different areas related to improving the employment 
outcomes of people with disabilities.

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
National Study of Health and Activity
DESCRIPTION
SSA sponsored study to better understand the relationship between disability and 
work, family, community, and access to health care.  Approximately 10,000 people 
with impairments will be interviewed.
TARGET POPULATION
All people with disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
SSA Disability Research Institute
DESCRIPTION
SSA will fund an institute to conduct research on how different factors affect 
the employment, rehabilitation, and disability program participation behavior of 
people with disabilities.
TARGET POPULATION
All people with disabilities

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
SSA Affective Disorders Demonstration
DESCRIPTION
Demonstration to study the effectiveness of providing improved access to quality 
treatment for affective disorders to DI beneficiaries who receive DI due to 
affective disorders.
TARGET POPULATION
DI beneficiaries with a primary diagnosis of affective disorder

PROGRAM/ POLICY/INITIATIVE
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) Study of Employment 
Supports Used by Working People with Disabilities
DESCRIPTION
This study, sponsored by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation (ASPE) within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), will 
collect qualitative data about the supports and other factors that contribute to 
the employment of successfully employed people with disabilities.
TARGET POPULATION
People with disabilities who are successfully employed
References
Livermore, G., D. Stapleton, M. Nowak, D. Wittenburg, E. Eiseman (2000). The 
Economics of Policies and Programs Affecting the Employment of People with 
Disabilities.  Draft Report for the U.S. Department of Education, National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research.
Stapleton, D., M. Fishman, G. Livermore, D. Wittenburg, A. Tucker, and S. 
Scrivner (1999).  Policy Evaluation of the Overall Effects of Welfare Reform on 
SSA Programs: Final Report.  Report prepared for the Social Security 
Administration (April 23, 1999).

References

Livermore, G., D. Stapleton, M. Nowak, D. Wittenburg, E. Eiseman (2000). The 
Economics of Policies and Programs Affecting the Employment of People with 
Disabilities. Draft Report for the U.S. Department of Education, National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research.

Stapleton, D., M. Fishman, G. Livermore, D. Wittenburg, A. Tucker, and S. 
Scrivner (1999). Policy Evaluation of the Overall Effects of Welfare Reform on 
SSA Programs: Final Report. Report prepared for the Social Security 
Administration (April 23, 1999).

Endnotes

1.  SGA is currently defined as the equivalent of working at a job that pays 
$700 or more a month.

2. It is important to note that some individuals might satisfy the income 
requirements of both SSI and DI and receive benefits from SSI and DI.

3. Insurers usually require their PDI beneficiaries to apply for DI.  

4. The five states include California, Hawaii, New Jersey, New York, and Rhode 
Island.

5. The TANF work requirements are relatively complex, but, in general, states 
must place adult TANF recipients in work no later than their twenty-fourth month 
of assistance.  TANF recipients who do not satisfy the work requirements are 
subject to either reduced benefits or benefit termination.  States that do not 
meet certain participation requirements are subject to financial penalties.

6. Further, state TANF offices might refer recipients to SSI to save state TANF 
dollars. Although an individual cannot receive benefits from TANF and SSI 
simultaneously, a family can.  In almost all states, the income of a TANF family 
increases when a member of the family transitions to SSI (i.e., the new SSI 
payments more than offsets the reduction in TANF).  Stapleton, et al (2000) 
found that a significant portion of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (the 
program that preceded TANF) recipients transitioned onto SSI before the 
enactment of TANF in 1996.  

7. For example, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires that manufacturers 
and providers of telecommunications equipment and services make the equipment 
and services they provide usable by people with disabilities (e.g., audio 
amplifiers and ring signal lights).  The Medicaid, Medicare, and State 
Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) programs all provide direct funding for different 
types of AT (e.g., durable medical equipment).  The Assistive Technology Act of 
1998 provides continuity grants for AT to states that have received fewer than 
10 years of funding under the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals with 
Disabilities Act of 1988. This act allows states the option of using grant money 
to increase funding for AT through state-financed systems.  Finally, as 
discussed in more detail later in the paper, the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) requires that employers make reasonable accommodations for their 
employees.  

8. Assistive Technology Act of 1998.

9. There are several examples of publicly funded PAS programs.  For example, 
Medicaid, Social Service Block Grants (Title XX), Title III of the Older 
Americans Act, State funds, VA Aid and Attendants Allowance, and Medicare 
provide services based on need and income level. In addition, under Section 
67(d) of the internal revenue code, impairment-related work expenses, including 
attendant care services at or in connection with the place of work, are tax 
deductible without regard to the threshold levels that ordinarily apply to the 
deduction for employee business expenses.  Finally, in recent years, four states 
have introduced acts that provide funding for PAS for people with disabilities, 
usually by reallocating funds from nursing home expenditures (Vermont's Personal 
Assistance Services Act of 1996, the Ohio Community Assistance Services Act of 
1996, Georgia's Long Term Care Choice Act of 1997, and the Community Attendant 
Services Act of Texas of 1997). Although these laws do not specifically target 
employed people with disabilities, they all share common features that might 
make it easier for users to enter the labor market.  

10. Some enter because of their participation in other programs (e.g., SSA VR 
Reimbursement Program).  Others might enter because of their involvement with a 
particular organization (e.g., school).  Finally, some enter the program on 
their own or because of a referral from a stakeholder.  VR offices are generally 
located in close proximity to, or with, other state program offices, such as 
TANF, and in many states are coordinated with one-stop delivery systems.

11. A panel of experts convened by the National Academy of Social Insurance 
(NASI) has recommended supplementing the earnings of people with disabilities 
directly through a Disabled Worker Tax Credit (DWTC).

12. The passage of the Welfare-to-Work Credit (WtWC) bolsters the value of this 
credit.

13. In addition, these provisions allow workers with disabilities who have a 
"Medigap" policy - a commercial insurance policy that provides benefits that are 
supplemental to Medicare - to suspend the premiums and benefits of the Medigap 
policy if they have employer-sponsored coverage.

14. Specifically, this provision gives SSA the authority to evaluate the effects 
changing the working eligibility rules for DI beneficiaries to allow DI 
beneficiaries to retain $1 of benefits for every $2 of earnings at a specified 
level.

15. Under the program, SSA will establish a competitive program of grants, 
cooperative agreements, or contracts to provide benefit planning and assistance, 
including information on the availability of protection and advocacy services, 
to DI and SSI beneficiaries; conduct or fund ongoing outreach efforts; and  
establish a corps of work incentive specialists within SSA who specialize in DI 
and SSI work incentives for the purpose of providing accurate information.  SSA 
will award grants for the outreach efforts based on a percentage of the 
population of disabled beneficiaries in the State. The total amount of all 
grants awarded will not exceed $23 million in each fiscal year from 2000 through 
2004.

16. Oregon, Minnesota, Mississippi, South Carolina are currently using the buy-
in, while Wisconsin and Alaska are planning to implement the buy-in in the near 
future. Ohio, California, New Mexico, North Carolina, and Oklahoma are seeking a 
waiver to expand Medicaid coverage.  Finally, Colorado, Arkansas, and Utah are 
expanding health care insurance/services.

17. All individuals who receive DI or SSI are automatically eligible under the 
WIA for VR services. In many states, these systems are directly linked to VR 
and/or TANF services. Core services include determinations of eligibility for 
assistance; intake and initial assessment services; job search, placement and 
career counseling; and provision of vocational rehabilitation services.

18. The Task Force published its Second Annual Report to the President in 
November 1999.  In the report, it reviewed progress toward objectives stated in 
the First Report and laid out new recommendations including the following: (1) 
Further integrating the efforts of various federal agencies including the 
Departments of Labor, Education, Justice, and Health and Human Services, the 
Social Security Administration, and the Office of Personnel Management; (2) 
improving the enforcement and increased utilization of already-existing 
legislation and further promoting the Federal government's role as a leader in 
the effort to increase employment among people with disabilities; (3) engaging 
in research to increase understanding of barriers to employment and to establish 
a reliable measure of the employment rate among people with disabilities; (4) 
developing and promoting the use of technology to make gainful employment more 
feasible for people with disabilities; and (5) promoting legislative efforts to 
make work more financially rewarding for people with disabilities.


