Workplace Accommodations for People Living with Multiple Sclerosis



Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a chronic and often disabling 
disease of the central nervous system that affects 
between 250,000 and 350,000 people living in the U.S. 
 MS is most commonly diagnosed in Caucasian women 
from northern European backgrounds who are between 
the ages of 18 and 30.  People living with MS are 
employed at a much lower rate than others.  Although 
95% of people with MS have a history of employment, 
in surveys of people 5 to 15 years after diagnosis, fewer 
that 25% are working.  There are a number of reasons 
for this high unemployment rate, but it is clear that many 
people living with MS would prefer to be working and 
could work productively with fairly minor 
accommodations in the workplace.

What is MS?

MS is a chronic disease characterized by the 
progressive destruction of the "white" matter in the 
nervous system - the myelin sheath that protects the 
nerves and allows for uninterrupted transmission of 
nerve impulses.  This progressive demyelinization is 
initially an inflammatory process that ultimately leads to 
the destruction of the nerve.  The initial inflammation is 
called an "exacerbation" and can often be treated using 
medications to reduce the residual damage. MS is now 
thought to be an autoimmune disorder that develops 
from a complex interaction of early exposure to multiple 
viruses and a genetic vulnerability.  There are new 
medications and other treatments that seem to be 
effective in altering the course of the disease for many 
people living with MS.  Researchers believe a cure is on 
the not-too-distant horizon.  It is critical that employers 
and co-workers understand that MS is not a contagious 
disease:  it cannot be transmitted to others under any 
circumstances.

What are the different courses MS takes?

There are three primary courses MS can take.  With 
the "relapsing-remitting" course, people experience 
"relapses" or "attacks" of symptoms, also called 
exacerbations.  People experience partial or total 
recovery of function after these exacerbations.  This is 
the most common form of MS in the U.S.  For some 
people, the relapsing-remitting course becomes 
progressive as they get older - that is, the relapses are 
less noticeable and the symptoms progress steadily.  
This is the "secondary progressive" course.  A minority 
of people with MS have the "primary progressive" 
course in which symptoms progress without remission.  
Understanding which course MS is taking is critical to 
designing effective employment accommodations.

What are the symptoms or limitations associated 
with MS?

It is impossible to predict which symptoms an individual 
with MS will have, and individuals may experience 
symptoms or limitations during an exacerbation that 
either resolve or are less troubling during remission.  
Because MS is a disease of the central nervous system, 
it can cause many kinds of limitations depending on 
where the "flare" up occurs.  The most common 
limitation people living with MS report is fatigue - what 
people with MS call MS fatigue because it is more 
profound than the fatigue with which most people are 
familiar.  People can also experience difficulty walking, 
using their hands, or with vision.  Some people have 
difficulty controlling their bladders or bowels.  Balance 
can be affected, as can sensation (e.g., in one's hands 
or fingertips).  One troubling limitation experienced by 
some people living with MS is related to cognitive 
changes, which can include problems with memory, 
handling multiple tasks, and thinking and responding 
quickly.  It is important that family members, employers, 
and co-workers remember that because most people 
living with MS have relapsing and remitting symptoms, 
an individual may experience significant fatigue, vision 
changes, problems walking, and memory problems 
during an exacerbation and have many of those 
limitations resolve a week or two later following 
treatment with medication and rest.  In many ways, the 
unpredictability of the disease, and the difficulty others 
have in "seeing" the limitations are as disabling as the 
limitations themselves.  For many, living with MS is 
living with an invisible disability - a disability that is 
difficult for the individual him or herself to understand 
and even more difficult for employers, co-workers, and 
others to grasp.  And yet, when both the individual with 
MS and others are fully informed, the individual may 
well be able to continue working productively.

Accommodations

Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
protects qualified individuals with disabilities against 
discrimination in employment on the basis of disability.  
While the determination of whether a person has a 
disability (which must take into account mitigating 
measures such as medication), or is qualified for the 
position in question must always be made on a case-by-
case basis, many people living with MS would be 
considered "qualified individuals with disabilities" under 
the ADA.  By definition, a qualified individual with a 
disability must be able to do the essential functions of 
the job with or without reasonable accommodation.  
Successful accommodations are often minor, requiring 
little or no expense.   Successful accommodations must 
always be conceived and implemented in collaboration 
with the employee with MS - this employee has the 
most expertise on his or her own disease, limitations, 
and potentially successful accommodations.  In fact, 
most people with MS have developed and employed a 
variety of informal accommodations on their own.  
Employees with MS also may require accommodations 
for several limitations and it is important that these 
accommodations be coordinated.

Fatigue.    During or immediately after an exacerbation, 
an individual may feel profoundly fatigued most of the 
time and may need to limit work activities for several 
weeks.  At other times, the employee will often be able 
to describe times when he or she has the most energy.  
It is not unusual for individuals to report that their "best 
times" are in the morning and they become 
progressively more fatigued during the day.  Modifying 
the schedule of work activities so that the employee can 
engage in asks demanding more physical and cognitive 
effort in the morning may be useful.  Strategies to 
provide an "economy" of energy also may be of benefit. 
 For example, reducing the amount of travel necessary 
by combining trips to the photocopy machine, or trips 
out of the building, or using a powered scooter for trips 
more than 10 feet from the desk may conserve energy.  
Built in rest time can be very useful.  Many people living 
with MS report that even brief 10-minute rests can help 
them make it through the day.  The trick is to schedule 
rest frequently enough to disrupt the development of 
more significant fatigue.  The option to work at home 
can be very helpful since the process of getting to and 
from work requires significant energy.  Many people 
with MS report that if they can work for a portion of 
the workday or workweek from home, they are more 
productive and less fatigued.  Regardless of the work 
setting, the ergonomic accommodations described next 
also limit fatigue.

Motor weakness.  An ergonomic work environment is 
a critical first step in the accommodation process.  
Ensure that the employee is properly positioned in the 
seat to minimize pain and fatigue, and that tasks in 
which the employee must engage are ergonomically 
positioned.  When considering an office setting, this 
includes not only the keyboard, but also the computer 
mouse, alternative computer access tools, monitor 
height, etc.  A number of reasonably priced adjustable 
workstations are now available that allow the keyboard, 
mouse, and monitor to be positioned independently.  
Some employees will find that using voice recognition 
software such as Dragon Naturally Speaking is 
helpful.  This software allows the employee to dictate 
text to the computer.  With either voice recognition or 
keyboarding, computer use becomes more efficient 
when routine tasks are automated using macro 
language.  For example, in Microsoft Word, the 
autotext feature may be employed so that the user can 
substitute a two or three letter combination for blocks 
of frequently used text. Using compressed keyboards 
may reduce fatigue and alternative mouse devices may 
improve access to the computer.  An employee can try 
out a variety of off-the-shelf devices at most well-
stocked computer stores.  The employee may want to 
consider keeping some type of power mobility at work, 
such as a scooter or power chair, to facilitate travel 
within the workplace.  Similar considerations should be 
made in other work settings as well.

Vision changes.  Vision changes are often transitory 
but vision may deteriorate over time.  High quality 
computer monitors with good contrast provide a good 
foundation for a computer station.  Screen enlargement 
software and contrast enhancement is built into 
operating systems such as Microsoft WIN98 and 
WIN2000.  Excellent screen enlargement software, 
which also "reads" to the user with synthesized speech, 
is available from vendors such as ZoomText.  Closed 
Circuit TV (CCTV) can be used to enhance the 
contrast and size of print for employees.  Various fixed 
and moveable lenses can allow people to magnify their 
work.  Accommodating vision changes often requires 
consultation with a specialist in low vision.

Bowel and Bladder Control.  These issues are usually 
managed by the employee and the employee's medical 
team.  As an accommodation, the employer may need 
to provide easy access to the restroom, an opportunity 
for the employee to change clothes, the opportunity to 
carefully schedule meals, and perhaps the option to 
work at home during times when bowel and bladder 
problems could be more acute.

Changes in Sensation.  The most common workplace 
accommodation for changes in sensation would be 
related to loss of sensation in the fingers and hands.  
This loss of sensation would often be accompanied by a 
loss of strength.  For someone with decreased 
sensation, it is more difficult to type accurately and 
manipulate small objects.  Keyboarding can be 
enhanced by placing Velcro or other tactile stimuli on 
"location" keys, or by using software which gives 
confirmation of keystrokes.  Experimenting with 
different computer pointing devices such as joysticks 
may also be useful.  Some people will find the voice 
recognition systems described earlier helpful in reducing 
the amount of keyboarding required.  For assembly 
work or related tasks, jigs may be designed to hold or 
guide objects and small parts.

Cognitive Changes.   The idea of requiring 
accommodation for cognitive changes may be 
frightening for an employee, but many of these 
accommodations are quite simple, non-intrusive, and 
allow the employee to work more effectively.  In some 
cases, these accommodations have been so intuitive and 
efficient that other employees have asked to have 
access to them! The accommodations described earlier 
for fatigue may also be helpful to address cognitive 
changes since the two are often intertwined.  Many 
people use memory books or computer calendars (e.g., 
personal digital assistants) to help with memory 
problems.  Some employees email themselves 
reminders to keep a "to do" list in their in-boxes.  
Desktop computer programs such as Microsoft 
Outlook can help manage schedules, "to-do lists, and 
contact lists.  These calendar programs can also be 
configured to send text messages from calendar entries 
to text pagers or cell phones that accept text messages. 
 This allows an employee to put reminders into a 
computer calendar system and have those reminders 
sent to his or her text pager during the day.  Structuring 
the work tasks to maximize routine, minimize 
distractions, and to sequence work efforts to reduce the 
demands of multitasking may be helpful.  Employers 
and employees with MS should begin by completing an 
analysis of the cognitive demands of the job, including 
interpersonal demands, before beginning the 
accommodation process.

Unpredictability of symptoms.  When planning 
accommodations in the workplace for people with MS, 
it is critical to consider the progression of MS.  While 
the progression of limitations cannot be predicted, it 
makes sense when planning accommodations for 
current needs to consider the future as well.  
Accommodations should also address episodic 
exacerbations where an employee may require a week 
of hospitalization or recovery from an exacerbation and 
perhaps a brief, graduated return to work.

Working and Living with MS

Most people with MS are of working age and either 
want to continue working or, if not currently at work, 
return to the workforce.  Many people with MS do not 
have limitations that impact their employment.  For 
those individuals who do have significant MS-related 
limitations affecting their employment, many can work 
successfully with reasonable accommodations that are 
typically minor in nature.  With recent medical advances 
relating to MS and advances in awareness and 
technology regarding job accommodations, MS will 
present fewer barriers to employment in the near future.

Resources

National Multiple Sclerosis Society
www.nmss.org

Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers1-800-
949-4232, www.adata.org

Job Accommodation Network1-800-526-7234, 
www.janwebicdi.wvu.edu

President's Committee on Employment of People with 
Disabilities1-202-376-6200, www.pcepd.gov

University of Washington National Research and Training 
Center on Multiple Sclerosiswww.msrrtc.washington.edu

U.S. Department of Justice1-800-514-0301, 
www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
For the nearest field office, call 800-669-EEOC (voice), 800-800-
3302 (TTY).  For publications on ADA employment issues, call 
800-669-4000 (voice), 800-669-6820 (TTY).  For online 
information, www.eeoc.gov

Tech Act Projects in each state for information and referral 
with reference to assistive technologies.
http://www.resna.org/taproject/at/statecontacts.html
This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It has been developed for Cornell University by 
Kurt L. Johnson, Ph.D., CRC.,  Director of Training for the 
U.W. National Research and Training Center on Multiple 
Sclerosis. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disabilit, and the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center.

Cornell University currently serves as the  Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org.

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment and 
Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension 
Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant from the National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and Rehabilitation Research 
(grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material 
are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint 
of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher. 
 The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its 
ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance Manual 
for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance. Cornell 
University is authorized by the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide information, materials, 
and technical assistance to individuals and entities that are covered by 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you should 
be aware that NIDRR is not responsible for enforcement of the ADA. 
 The information, materials, and/or technical assistance are intended 
solely as informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your 
legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA. The Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has issued enforcement 
guidance which provides additional clarification of various elements of 
the Title I provisions under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance 
documents are available for viewing and downloading from the EEOC 
web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 

Workplace Accommodations for People Living with Multiple Sclerosis
May, 2001	Cornell University
