Workplace Accommodations for Individuals with Arthritis

Arthritis is the number one cause of disability in the United States, making up 
nearly 20 percent of all disabilities among people aged 15 and over.  An 
estimated 43 million Americans are affected by the disease.  Many face work-
related physical limitations.  The total cost of arthritis, including medical 
care and lost productivity, is nearly $65 billion per year.

A Brief Overview of Arthritis
It is important to note that there are more than 100 different types of 
arthritis, each producing different symptoms and levels of impairment.  Some of 
the most common forms of arthritis include osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
fibromyalgia, and lupus.  

Osteoarthritis, often called degenerative arthritis, involves the breakdown of 
bones and cartilage, causing pain and stiffness.  Osteoarthritis commonly 
affects the movement and function of fingers, knees, feet, hips, and back.  

Rheumatoid arthritis is an abnormality in the immune system causing inflammation 
of the lining in the joints and/or internal organs.  Rheumatoid arthritis often 
affects the same joints on both sides of the body and can affect the hands, 
wrists, feet, knees, ankles, shoulders, neck, jaw, and elbows.  The disease may 
also cause inflammation of internal organs, leading to significant organ damage.  
Individuals with rheumatoid arthritis are likely to experience times when they 
have few symptoms and other times when they have very severe symptoms causing 
significant limitations.

Fibromyalgia has become a more common diagnosis during the past several years.  
It is a condition that affects muscles and their attachments to bone and is 
characterized by widespread pain, fatigue, stiffness, sleep disturbance, and 
psychological distress.

Lupus is a rheumatic disease affecting skin and body tissue.  Additionally, some 
people experience involvement of organs such as kidneys, lungs, or heart.  Lupus 
is generally diagnosed between age 18 and 45.  Symptoms include skin rashes, 
abnormal sun sensitivity, and joint pain, inflammation, and stiffness.  Lupus is 
treatable, but can be a very serious impairment.  Individuals with lupus will 
experience flares and remissions.  A flare is a period of worsening symptoms.  A 
remission is a period with few or no symptoms of the disease.

Regardless of the specific diagnosis, individuals with arthritis need 
appropriate rest and exercise.  It is important that they learn to pace their 
activities and maintain appropriate self-care skills to minimize pain and 
functional loss.  With reasonable accommodations from employers, many people 
with arthritis continue to be productive employees.  

Who is considered an individual with a disability?
Many people with arthritis would meet the definition of an "individual with a 
disability" under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  Under the ADA, an 
individual with a disability is a person who: has a physical or mental 
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a 
record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment.  

An impairment is substantially limiting if it prevents or significantly 
restricts the performance of a major life activity.  The nature, severity, 
duration, and long-term impact of the condition are all factors that go into 
determining whether an impairment rises to the level of an ADA disability.  
Mitigating measures, such as medication, must also be considered.  Thus, if an 
individual's arthritis is completely or substantially controlled with medication 
all the time, s/he would not be considered to have an ADA disability because the 
condition does not substantially limit a major life activity.

The ADA does not cover impairments that are relatively minimal in nature and 
severity or that are considered short-term (e.g., mild arthritis in a finger 
causing only occasional discomfort).  Many forms of arthritis (e.g., rheumatoid, 
lupus) can be controlled with proper treatment.  However, even when properly 
treated, an individual with arthritis may have periods of severe pain and 
functional limitation.  In this situation, the ADA would apply even when the 
arthritis is in remission.  Chronic conditions that are substantially limiting 
when active or have a high likelihood of recurrence in substantially limiting 
forms are covered under the ADA.

What are reasonable accommodations?
The ADA requires employers to provide reasonable accommodations to qualified 
disabled individuals in three areas of employment: 1) the job application 
process, 2) job functions, and 3) benefits and privileges of employment. A 
reasonable accommodation is any modification to a job, employment practice or 
process, or a work environment that makes it possible for an individual with a 
disability to successfully fulfill the duties of a job.  Employers are not 
required to provide items primarily for personal use, such as purchasing a 
wheelchair. 

Reasonable accommodations are not nearly as costly as many employers fear.  A 
study conducted by the Job Accommodation Network (JAN)  in 1990 showed that one 
third of all accommodations were accomplished with no cost to the employer and 
more than half cost $1,000.00 or less; eighty percent of the accommodations that 
JAN suggests cost less than $500.00.  Additionally, most employers surveyed 
indicated that their company had benefited overall financially as a result of 
making job accommodations.

How do I know the requested accommodation is necessary and is the most 
appropriate accommodation?
The individual with a disability will likely have a great deal of experience 
modifying tasks.  It is logical to use his/her expertise.  It is also important 
to consider the individual's preferences as well as the employer's needs.  
Working together to outline various options for accommodating the individual 
will likely be the most beneficial approach.  Occupational therapists can also 
help by completing evaluations of the workstation and the employee's 
functioning.  The therapist can offer suggestions for modifying the workstation 
or the process the employee uses to complete a task.  S/he will work with the 
employer and employee to find accommodations that are both effective and 
reasonable.  Assistance is also available through organizations such as the 
regional ADA Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, the Job 
Accommodation Network, and the local Vocational Rehabilitation office.

What types of accommodations should be considered?
Accommodations for employees with arthritis may be administrative or mechanical 
in nature.  Administrative accommodations may include reassigning or 
reallocating marginal duties, being flexible about how or when tasks are 
performed, and allowing a flexible work schedule or telecommuting.  Reassignment 
to a different, available job is also an option if no other accommodation is 
effective.

Mechanical accommodations include modifying the employee's workstation, 
modifying or providing special tools or equipment, and ensuring that the 
building, the work area, and other non-work areas used by employees, such as 
restrooms and break rooms, are accessible.

For example, an employee with osteoarthritis of the hips or knees may have 
difficulty standing all day.  Providing a stool of the appropriate height would 
allow the individual to alternate between sitting and standing at a workstation 
without interrupting production.  Another person may have difficulty sitting for 
long periods.  If s/he works at a desk, a podium could be used to raise the work 
surface allowing the employee to change positions as needed.

More significant accommodations for an individual with arthritis in the lower 
extremities could include moving a workstation to a ground floor to alleviate 
the need to climb stairs, or providing another employee to assist with lifting 
or other physically demanding non-essential tasks.

Arthritis in the hands and arms can be particularly problematic for an 
individual whose job requires repetitive hand function such as factory assembly 
or typing.  There are a number of adaptive tools available to assist individuals 
with grasping and manipulating objects.  These tools may be especially effective 
if the individual has arthritis in only one hand.  Moving the individual from a 
job requiring finger manipulations to one requiring gross handling may be an 
alternative for some individuals.  Computer technology provides a number of 
alternatives for individuals with arthritis in the upper extremities.  Adaptive 
keyboards that reduce stress on the arms are available through most computer 
dealers.  Additionally, a number of voice-activated computer software packages 
are available to reduce the amount of actual typing the individual must perform.  
These programs are fairly inexpensive and user-friendly.

Some individuals with arthritis have more difficulty in the morning.  Providing 
a flexible work schedule allowing the employee to start work later in the 
morning may significantly improve the individual's ability to perform work 
functions.  Many employers allow employees to work from home.  This allows 
employees to set a schedule that best fits their needs and provides the 
opportunity to change positions and take breaks when needed.

These are only a few examples of appropriate accommodations for employees with 
arthritis.  Many accommodations can be achieved with little cost to the employer 
and minimal disruption of the work site.  Generally, the cost of the 
accommodation is far less than the cost of disability payments.

Who can I contact for more information?
For answers to specific questions regarding the ADA or arthritis, please contact 
the sources listed below.

ADA information:

Disability & Business Technical Assistance Centers  
http://www.adata.org/
800-949-4232

ADA Homepage 
www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm

ADA Information Line 
for publications, questions, and referrals.
800-514-0301 (voice) 800-514-0383 (TTY)

Access Board 
offers technical assistance on ADA accessibility guidelines.
http://www.access-board.gov
800-872-2253 (voice)
800-993-2822 (TTY)

Internal Revenue Services 
provides information on tax credits and deductions that can assist businesses in 
complying with ADA.  
http://www.irs.gov/plain/index.html
800-829-1040 (voice)
800-829-4059 (TTY)

Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund Hotline 
provides technical assistance, education, advocacy, and legal assistance 
relative to the ADA and individuals with disabilities.
http://www.dredf.org
Phone: 800-466-4232

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
offers technical assistance on the ADA provisions governing employment.  
http://www.eeoc.gov
Question lines:
800-669-4000 (voice) 
800-669-6820 (TTY)
Publications: 
	800-669-3362 (voice) 
	00-800-3302 (TTY)

Arthritis and Employment information:

Missouri Arthritis Rehabilitation Research and Training Center (MARRTC) 
http://muhealth.org/~arthritis
or toll free 877-882-6826

Arthritis Foundation 
http://www.arthritis.org
800-283-7800

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
http://www.cdc.gov

Job Accommodation Network   
800-526-7234
PO Box 6080
Morgantown, WV 26505-6080
Accommodating people with arthritis website at 
http://www.jan.wvu.edu/media/Arthritis.html

ABLEDATA
A national database of assistive technology information
8455 Colesville Road, Suite 935
Silver Spring, MD 20910-3319
800-227-0216
http://www.abledata.com

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices and workplace 
accommodations for persons with disabilities edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, 
Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, Program on Employment and Disability, School of 
Industrial and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University.  It was 
developed for Cornell University in January, 2001 by Christy Clark, M.Ed. 
Graduate Research Assistant, Missouri Arthritis Rehabilitation Research and 
Training Center, with editorial assistance from Dianna Borsi O'Brien, M.A., 
Senior Information Specialist, Missouri Arthritis Rehabilitation Research and 
Training Center.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. Department of 
Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research as a 
National Materials Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of new 
brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on Employment and Disability, 
the Pacific Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and other 
supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also conducting employment policy and 
practices research, examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been funded by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research  (Grant #H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on Employment of 
Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be found at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports relating to employment practices 
and policies on disability civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment and Disability, 
Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 
(Voice), 607/255-2891 (TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical Assistance Program 
and Regional Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-
4232 (voice/TTY), www.adata.org.

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment and Disability, School 
of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension Division, Cornell University, and 
funded by a grant from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
and Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those 
of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's 
interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 
1630), Technical Assistance Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement 
Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide information, materials, and technical 
assistance to individuals and entities that are covered by the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, and/or 
technical assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, and are neither a 
determination of your legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor 
binding on any agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued enforcement guidance 
which provides additional clarification of various elements of the Title I 
provisions under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance documents are available for 
viewing and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 
Workplace Accommodations for Individuals with Arthritis

January, 2001  Cornell University

