Acknowledgment 

The survey was conducted by Cornell University under the auspices, including the 
funding, of the Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities. Dr. 
Richard Horne, Senior Policy Advisor, served as Project Officer for the study and 
provided the leadership that helped ensure quality survey results. 

The Staff of the Cornell University Computer-Assisted Survey Team (CAST), and its 
Director Yasamin DiCiccio conducted the telephone survey; Carolyn Wong, Student 
Assistant, assisted in further identification of needed contact information for supervisors 
in various agencies; and Sara VanLooy, Research Assistant, provided research and 
administrative support. 

A list of the collaborating Federal agencies of the Task Force is included in Appendix B. 
Many individuals within the specific agencies made this study possible with their 
significant assistance in helping us design additional items needed for this survey, 
selecting the needed random sample of supervisors, and locating specific supervisors 
targeted in the sample Therefore, we would like to acknowledge and thank those 
individuals who cooperated and contributed so much to making this study, with a 
response rate of 93 percent, so very successful. Those receiving our specific thanks and 
recognition are: 

Mercedes Olivari, Rosemary Downing, and Kitty Kobert, Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) provided significant support and guidance in the preparation of the 
survey. Charles Kawecki, OPM, helped prepare the list of agency contact names. Bob 
Heim, OPM, implemented the sample selection using the design criteria. Keith Bailey, 
Department of Labor, assisted in conducting focus groups of representative Federal 
personnel that provided valuable input for the survey instrument design. 

Agency liaisons who provided supervisor contact information were: Tanya Cantrell and 
Carlotta Grinage, Department of the Treasury; Al Stewart, Department of Labor; 
Michelle Sutton, Federal Communications Commission; Cathy Williams, Department of 
Veterans Affairs; Dan Adams, Department of Education; Sandra Timbrook, Department 
of Housing and Urban Development; Frank Chow, Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission; Donna Harris and Octavia Smith, Social Security Administration; Janet 
Cope, OPM; Tami Washington, Department of the Interior; Bill Taylor, Department of 
Justice; Ethel D. Briggs, National Council On Disability; Carolyn Parker and Ted 
Slusarczyk, Department of Commerce; Barbara Iba, Department of Health and Human 
Services; Steve Kuhns, Small Business Administration; Cliff Taylor and John Robertson, 
Department of Agriculture; and Marc Brenman and Jackie Lewis, Department of 
Transportation. 

Our sincere thanks to each of these individuals and their respective agencies for the 
collaboration and support that made this study possible. 

Susanne M. Bruyère, Director  William A. Erickson, Research Specialist  Program on 
Employment and Disability  Cornell University 7 


Note: Footnotes are indicated with a * before the number.  Footnotes follow the text of 
the report, before the appendices; Footnotes for the summary and implications section 
follow the footnotes and begin numbering with 1 again

Background

The Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities (Task Force) was 
established by Executive Order 13078 to create a coordinated and aggressive national 
policy to increase the employment rate of persons with disabilities. Seventeen Federal 
agencies serve as members of the Task Force. Secretary of Labor Elaine L. Chao is the 
Task Force Chair. The other member agencies are the  Department of Education, 
Department of Veterans  Affairs, Department of Health and Human Services,  the Social 
Security Administration, Department of the  Treasury, Department of Commerce, 
Department of  Transportation, Office of Personnel Management, Small  Business 
Administration, Equal Employment Opportunity  Commission, Federal Communications 
Commission,  National Council on Disability, Department of Housing  and Urban 
Development, Department of the Interior,  Department of Agriculture, and Department of 
Justice. 

The Task Force provided support to Cornell University  to conduct research in order to 
address the Task Force  mandate that relates to the Federal government as a  model 
employer of people with disabilities. This research  is a part of the efforts of the Task 
Force to meet the  Section 2( a) mandate of the Executive Order. This  mandate states that 
"É the Office of Personnel Management,  the Department of Labor, and the Equal 
Employment  Opportunity Commission shall submit to the Task  Force a review of 
Federal Government personnel laws,  regulations, and policies and, as appropriate, shall  
recommend or implement changes necessary to improve  Federal employment policy for 
adults with disabilities.  This review shall include personnel practices and actions  such 
as: hiring, promotion, benefits, retirement,  workers' compensation, retention, accessible 
facilities,  job accommodations, layoffs, and reductions in force." 

The first step in this endeavor was to conduct an analysis of the policy and practice 
efforts of Federal agency Human Resource Directors and Equal Employment Opportunity 
(EEO) personnel in recruiting and retaining persons with disabilities in Federal 
employment. The survey of U. S. Federal agencies, titled Survey  of the Federal 
Government on Human Resources/ EEO  Policies and Practices in Employment of People 
with  Disabilities was completed in 1999. This research  identified how Federal agencies 
were responding to the  employment disability nondiscrimination requirements  of the 
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA)  and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 1 as 
amended. In  November 1999, the Task Force released the results of  this survey in a 
report, Disability Employment Policies  and Practices in U. S. Federal Government 
Agencies,  which included recommendations based on the findings  from the study. *2 

One of the recommendations from this research was to  conduct a follow-up study of 
Federal agency supervisors  and managers about their experience in accommodation  and 
employment of persons with disabilities in  the Federal sector, and in addition to inquire 
about  their awareness of the series of Executive Orders issued  in 2000 supporting 
employment and accommodation  of individuals with disabilities in the Federal 
workforce.  This second survey activity was initiated in Spring of 2001. This report, 
therefore, provides information on  the results from this current survey of supervisors and  
managers, which parallels similar information obtained  from the initial survey of human 
resource and EEO  professionals across the Federal government. It describes  supervisors' 
experiences with accommodation of  people with disabilities as applicants and employees  
in the Federal workforce, and their experience and  perceptions of the effectiveness of 
existing and  proposed resources to facilitate the hiring, retention,  and accommodation of 
people with disabilities. 

A final study will focus on the perspectives of Federal  employees with disabilities, and a 
separate report  detailing the results of this study will also be issued  shortly. A report 
comparing the responses from Federal  agency human resource (HR) and Equal 
Employment  Opportunity (EEO) professionals with the Federal  supervisors and 
managers similarly surveyed, and the  focus group of employees with disabilities will be  
provided in a separate summarizing report. 

This U. S. Federal supervisor survey research effort was conducted by the Program on 
Employment and Disability, with the assistance of the Computer Assisted Survey Team 
(CAST), both located in the School of Industrial and Labor Relations at Cornell 
University. 

Cornell University, founded in 1868, is one of the Ivy  League institutions in the 
Northeastern United States,  and is based upon a unique integration of publicly and  
privately funded colleges. The Cornell University School  of Industrial and Labor 
Relations is the foremost school  of its kind in the world, boasting over fifty years of  
leadership and service. It hosts the largest collection of  scholars in human resources and 
issues related to the  workplace, and includes the areas of human resources,  
organizational behavior, labor relations, collective  bargaining, labor economics, and 
social statistics. The  Extension Division of the School of Industrial and  Labor Relations 
at Cornell University has provided  continuing education and technical assistance,  
nationally and regionally, on issues surrounding the  workplace and disability for over 30 
years. The Program on Employment and Disability contributes to development of 
inclusive workplace systems and communities for people with disabilities through 
research, the development of training materials, dissemination of this information in 
training efforts regionally, nationally, and internationally, provision of technical 
assistance on related topics, and production of scholarly materials.  The Computer-
Assisted Survey Team (CAST) is a full-service  survey facility housed in the School of 
Indus-trial  and Labor Relations offering state-of-the-art  technology to researchers at 
Cornell University and  elsewhere; this unit provided data collection and  statistical 
analysis support for this survey. 

Organization of the Report 

The results of the current survey are presented in this report as descriptive information 
without analysis; the implications of the survey information are discussed at the end, in 
the section titled "Summary and Implications." 

Methodology 

A ten page, approximately 200 item survey was designed to capture information on the 
experiences and perceptions of supervisors and managers in the 17 Task Force member 
agencies in response to the employment nondiscrimination requirements of Federal civil 
rights legislation and recent Executive Branch directives and initiatives related to the 
accommodation process and the employment/  supervision of individuals with 
disabilities. The survey  was designed to parallel the previous Task Force/  Cornell 
University survey of 403 Human Resources and  EEO representatives across 97 Federal 
agencies per-formed  in 1999, which itself drew extensively from a  similar survey of 
private sector employers by Cornell  University in 1998. 3 

Several new sections and questions were designed to  specifically address supervisors' 
experience and the  unique issues they deal with in the workplace. The  survey covers 
issues dealing with: demographics and  experience of supervisors; their awareness, use 
and  perception of the helpfulness of reasonable accommodation resources; recruitment, 
pre-employment screening,  testing, and new employee orientation; opportunities  for 
promotion and training; disciplinary and  termination processes; supervisors' training on 
employment  disability nondiscrimination and on the  accommodation process, including 
the effectiveness of  incentives for supervisor training; resources used and  found most 
helpful in handling disability nondiscrimination  and accommodation disputes; the role of  
disability management ("return to work") programs in  contributing to the 
accommodation process, as well  as co-worker and supervisor acceptance of employees  
with disabilities; and supervisors' awareness and the  impact of recent Executive Branch 
directives and  initiatives, including Section 508, and the Federal  initiative regarding 
telecommuting/telework for  individuals with significant disabilities. A copy of  the 
survey is provided in Appendix A. 

According to the most recent Federal Civilian Workforce  Statistics, *4 the 17 Task Force 
agencies account for  over half (54 percent) of the total employees in the  Executive 
branch of the Federal government, employing  close to a million employees (948,867). 
These agencies  employ 63,424 people with disabilities (seven percent  of all employees 
in these agencies), including 11,790  employees 5 (less than one percent) with EEOC 
targeted  disabilities. Nearly 100,000 (n= 99,982) of these one  million employees have 
supervisory responsibilities, with  blue-collar supervisors accounting for eight percent of  
this population and white-collar supervisors making  up the remaining 92 percent (Office 
of Personnel  Management personal communication, March 8, 2001).  This is the group 
of supervisors from which the  participants were selected for this study. 

An initial sample of approximately 3,000 supervisors  was randomly selected by the U. S. 
Office of Personnel  Management (OPM) from the pool of all supervisors  in the 17 Task 
Force member agencies. This sample  includes both supervisors and managers with 
supervisory  duties as defined by OPM's classification system. For  simplification in 
describing the results, in the remainder  of this report the term "supervisor" will be used 
to  refer to the participants of the study. The sampling  strategy included oversampling for 
smaller agencies  and blue-collar supervisors to provide adequate numbers,  allowing for 
more accurate estimates for these potentially  unique groups. Contact information (e-mail  
addresses and phone numbers) for the supervisors  selected were solicited from each 
participating agency,  resulting in 2,448 supervisors with complete information.  Except 
for the National Council on Disability,  which has only 2 supervisors, information from 
50  supervisors was the desired minimum from each  agency, with larger agencies getting 
proportionally  more above this minimum. The overall target for the survey was 1000 
respondents. 

The survey was conducted by telephone by Cornell  University's Computer Assisted 
Survey Team (CAST)  using a CATI (Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing)  
system. An initial pilot test of the phone survey  instrument was conducted with 20 
supervisors to fine-tune  the questions and response categories prior to  full survey 
implementation. For the full survey, respondents  received a notification via e-mail 
(letters were  used in the case of the Department of Veteran's Affairs)  from the Task 
Force explaining the project and requesting  their participation. Respondents were then 
contacted by telephone a few days later to arrange for an interview time. Notifications 
were first sent on July  11, 2001, and phone contacts began two days later.  Due to delays 
caused by the events of September 11,  2001, data collection was completed January 10, 
2002.  To be eligible to participate in the survey, each respondent  had to be a supervisor 
of at least one employee  and have at least twelve months of actual supervisory  
experience. A total of 1,001 surveys were completed, by 191 blue-collar and 810 white-
collar supervisors, across the 17 Task Force member agencies (see Appendix B for 
sample breakdown by agency). The response  rate was very high, with 93 percent of 
supervisors  contacted participating. Agency and blue-collar/  white-collar completion 
targets were achieved in all  but one agency. 

Data Analysis 

Due to the differences in the types and nature of positions supervised by blue and white-
collar supervisors, responses to each question were compared using Chi-squared tests or 
T-tests as appropriate, to determine if the answers were significantly different (at a level 
of p= 0.05) and should be presented separately. As only nine of the 17 Task Force 
agencies had any blue-collar supervisors, there was a  possibility that differences found 
might be driven by  differences between agencies with and without blue-collar  
supervisors. Therefore, all blue/ white-collar  significant differences were retested 
restricting the  sample to the nine agencies with blue and white-collar  supervisors 
(thereby controlling for agency). If the  difference remained significant with this agency  
controlled sample (in most cases it did), it is likely  driven by actual differences between 
blue and white-collar  supervisors and is presented as such in this  report. In addition, 
selected questions were examined  comparing supervisors who reported supervising  
employees with disabilities to those who had no such  experience. As supervisors with 
employees with disabilities  were more likely to supervise larger numbers of  employees 
(which could impact their responses),  all analysis controlled for the number of 
employees  supervised. These groupings were virtually identical in  the proportion of blue 
and white-collar supervisors. 

The results presented in this report exclude "don't  know" and "refused" response 
categories. However,  these accounted for less than two percent of all  responses, unless 
otherwise noted. All information is  presented in aggregate to protect the confidentiality  
of the individual respondents and their agencies. 

Survey Respondents 

The supervisors surveyed had significant supervisory experience in the Federal 
government. A summary of selected supervisor characteristics is presented in Appendix 
C. Over half of the participating supervisors (56 percent) were senior management, in 
General Schedule grades of 13-15 (range 1-15 with 15 being the highest grade level). 
Over 95 percent of the supervisors surveyed had been with their agency five  or more 
years. Fully half the respondents reported  more than ten years of experience as a Federal 
supervisor,  with 23 percent reporting six to ten years and  27 percent reporting between 
one and five years. As  noted above, all respondents were required to have  been a 
supervisor for at least one year and supervise  at least one employee to participate in the 
survey.  Over 85 percent of the supervisors contacted fulfilled  these criteria. 

In response to the question: "number of Federal employees  you are the immediate 
supervisor of," over a third  of respondents (36 percent) supervised between 1-6  
employees, a third (33 percent) supervised between 7-12  employees and the remainder 
(31 percent) supervised  more than 12. A second question asked about the total  number 
of employees they supervised. More than two  out of five (43 percent) supervised a total 
of 1-10  employees, a quarter (25 percent) supervised 11-20,  a quarter (25 percent) 
supervised between 21 and 90  employees, with the remainder (7 percent) supervising  
more than 90 employees. Overall, the number of employees  immediately supervised by 
this group of supervisors  was nearly 15,000, with the total number of employees  
supervised approaching 40,000. Three out of five  supervisors reported experience 
supervising at least  one employee with a disability over the last five years. 

Findings at a Glance 

Supervisor characteristics and experience with accommodation 

*  The supervisors surveyed had significant experience  in the Federal government, with 
over half reporting  ten or more years as a Federal supervisor. 

*  Nearly two-thirds of the supervisors surveyed had at  least one employee with a 
disability and/ or had made  at least one accommodation over the past five years  or in 
their tenure as a Federal supervisor (whichever is  less). 

*   When asked about the kinds of accommodations  made overall for employees with 
disabilities, supervisors  most often reported having advocated to make  existing facilities 
accessible to an employee with a  disability, or modifying a work environment. The  
accommodations made by the fewest supervisors were  reassignment to a vacant position 
and providing a job  coach. 

*  Of those reporting having supervised an individual  with a disability over the past five 
years, most re-ported  supervising people with musculoskeletal  injuries, and/ or hearing 
and vision impairments. 

*  When asked who makes the final decision on the  provision of an accommodation, half 
the respondents  indicated that either they make the decision in  consultation with their 
immediate supervisor, or they  make the decision themselves, as the immediate  
supervisor of the requesting employee. 

*  Three-quarters of the respondents indicated that  their agency has a formal process in 
place for handling  accommodations requests. 

*  The resources for accommodation assistance used  by the largest number of 
supervisors were human  resource personnel at the central and servicing/ sub-agency  
levels. 

*  Close to half of the supervisors were not aware  of the following accommodation 
resources: the Job  Accommodation Network (JAN), the Disability Services  Office, 
disabled employee advisory groups, and selective  placement coordinators. Interestingly, 
supervisors  with experience supervising one or more employees  with disabilities were 
no more likely to be aware of  these four resources than those without experience.  
However, they were more aware of Independent Living  Centers (87 percent compared to 
79 percent), State  Rehabilitation agencies (85 percent compared to 78  percent) and 
external health care providers (87  percent compared to 81 percent) as resources. 

Recruitment, pre-employment screening, testing and orientation 

*  Eighty percent of the respondents reported having made a hire in the past five years (or 
since they became a Federal supervisor, whichever was less), with one-third  of these 
reporting that they had hired at least  one person with a disability in this period. 

*  One-third of the respondents reported being very  involved in recruitment within their 
agency, with  white-collar supervisors more likely to be involved  than blue-collar. 

*  Over half of the supervisors involved in recruitment  reported being very familiar or 
somewhat familiar with  the special hiring authorities for the Federal government  that 
promote hiring disabled veterans, while approximately  one-third were familiar with 
hiring readers/  interpreters and other personal assistants for employees  with disabilities, 
and the special hiring authorities  for hiring people with cognitive disabilities (mental  
retardation), significant physical disabilities, or people  who have recovered from mental 
illness. Supervisors  with experience supervising one or more employees  with disabilities 
reported greater familiarity with each  of the special hiring authorities than those who had  
not supervised employees with disabilities. 

*  Over half of the respondents reported that when  changes were made to accommodate 
individuals with  disabilities in the recruitment and pre-employment  screening processes, 
these changes were easy or very  easy to make. 

*  Over half of the respondents indicated that the  agency set reasonable affirmative 
employment goals  and made an effort to achieve these goals. 

*  More than a third of supervisors surveyed reported  being unfamiliar or very unfamiliar 
with accommodations  for persons with communication disabilities,  such as adapting 
print materials used in the interview  (to large print, diskette, or Braille), using a reader  
to assist a person with a learning disability or visual  impairment, using a teletypewriter 
(TTY) or relay  service to set up interviews, and accessing sign  language interpreters. 
Surprisingly, supervisors with  experience supervising employees with disabilities  were 
not significantly more familiar with these accommodations  than those who had not 
supervised any  employees with disabilities. 

Opportunities for promotion and advancement for people with disabilities

**When asked about continuing barriers to employment  or advancement of people with 
disabilities, supervisors  most often identified the lack of related experience or  requisite 
skills and training on behalf of the individuals  with disabilities, lack of supervisor 
knowledge of which  accommodation to make, the workplace failing to  provide an 
accommodation when needed, and attitudes  and stereotypes towards people with 
disabilities.  Interestingly, the perception of these barriers was  not significantly different 
between supervisors with  experience supervising employees with disabilities and  
supervisors without employees with disabilities. 

*  Supervisors responding to this survey identified  visible top management commitment 
and skills/  training for employees with disabilities as the most  effective means of 
reducing these remaining barriers  to employment or advancement of people with 
disabilities. 

*  Almost nine out of ten respondents reported that  the agency has a grievance or dispute 
resolution  process to deal with disability and accommodation  issues. 

Supervisor training and resources on ADA/ accommodation/ disability issues 

*  Nine out of ten respondents reported having had  some formal disability civil rights 
training as a Federal  supervisor, with approximately half of those who  received training 
receiving between one to 15 hours  of training. This training was most often provided as a  
part of general employment discrimination or diversity  training, or of general 
supervisory/ management training.  Supervisors who had employees with disabilities 
were  significantly more likely to have received training. 

*  Supervisors' top three choices for more information  included: accommodations for 
mental illness, more  information about the accommodation process generally,  and the 
special hiring authorities. 

*  Respondents saw making disability employment a  mandatory element of management 
training as the  most effective incentive to encourage disability  nondiscrimination related 
training. 

*  Supervisors surveyed were asked which resources  they most often used to help resolve 
issues. About a  third reported using HR staff/ employee relations, EEO  Office, and 
safety and ergonomic staff, while the Job  Accommodation Network (JAN), disabilities 
services  office, and the selective placement coordinator were  used by less than one in 
ten. 

*  Over half of the respondents reported having a  formal disability management program 
with written  policies and procedures, with blue-collar supervisors  more likely to be 
aware of such a program. 

Presidential Orders to promote hiring/ accommodation of people with disabilities 

*  Approximately three of four supervisors reported  that the following would be helpful 
in implementing  the Technology Nondiscrimination requirements of  Section 508: The 
technical staff within their agency  (i. e. chief information officer/ helpdesk), centralized  
technical assistance on technology accessibility issues,  and training procurement 
specialists in Section 508  requirements. 

*  About a third of the supervisors were aware of the  Federal initiative regarding 
telecommuting/ telework  for individuals with significant disabilities. 

*  When asked whether, in their opinion, office-based  full time positions that they 
currently supervised could  be relocated to home-based or other off-site facilities,  
approximately one-third of the white-collar supervisors  reported that this was possible. 
Less than six percent  of the blue-collar supervisors saw this as possible.  Supervisors of 
employees with disabilities were more  likely to say they would be able to make current  
positions either home-based or split home-office. 

*  When asked about the ability to develop full-time  positions that could be performed 
from home or another  off-site location, respondents indicated it would be  easier to split 
such positions between home and off-site,  rather than to develop full-time positions that  
would be dedicated to off-site employment. Supervisors  of employees with disabilities 
viewed the development  of these new positions as easier than did  those without 
experience with employees with disabilities. 

*  Approximately half of the white-collar supervisors  indicated that it would be easy to 
accommodate an  individual with a chronic illness or disability with the  ability to work at 
home for one to two days each week  or intermittently. Blue-collar supervisors were far 
less  likely to say that this arrangement would be easy or  even possible. 

*  Respondents indicated that off-site technology  support, guidelines for performance 
assessment of off-site  workers, and formal flexplace agreements between  off-site 
employees and supervisors would be helpful to  them as a supervisor in creating or 
supporting home-based  or off-site/ flexplace/ telecommuting employee  position. 

*  Three out of five respondents (60 percent) were  unaware of the Federal initiative 
(Executive Order  13163) requiring the hiring of 100,000 qualified  individuals with 
disabilities over the next five years.  White collar supervisors and supervisors who had  
experience with employees with disabilities were more  likely to be aware of this 
initiative. Of those reporting  they were aware of this order, about two in five said  that it 
had influenced their recruitment and hiring  practices either "somewhat" or "a great deal." 

*  Two out of five supervisors surveyed reported being  aware of the EEOC Guidelines 
for Federal agencies to  establish written procedures to facilitate the provision  of 
reasonable accommodation (Executive Order 13164).  Nearly half of those aware of this 
provision indicated  that it had influenced their supervisory practice either  "a great deal" 
or "somewhat." The level of awareness  and influence was higher for those who had 
experience  supervising employees with disabilities. 

Survey Results 

This section of the report covers specific survey results. It discusses the following topics: 
supervisors' report on accommodations for applicants, supervisors' report on 
accommodation practices, opportunities for promotion/ training for people with 
disabilities, supervisor experience in resolving disability discrimination issues, training 
on civil rights-related topics, disability management and workplace accommodations,  
and awareness and implementation to date of  Executive Orders relating to promoting the 
employment  of individuals with disabilities in the Federal  workforce. 

Supervisors Report on Accommodations for Applicants 

Several survey questions dealt with inquiries about  how involved supervisors were in the 
recruitment  processes. Specifically, those surveyed were asked how  many people they 
had hired in the past five years,  how many of these were individuals with disabilities,  
and the extent to which the agency sets affirmative  employment goals. In addition, 
supervisors were asked  about their familiarity with particular hiring authorities  for 
individuals with disabilities in the Federal  government, as well as changes made to the 
applicant  process to accommodate people with disabilities, and  familiarity with 
applicant interviewing. 

Involvement in the Recruitment Process  Half of the supervisors reported being very or 
fairly  involved in the recruitment process, with one-third  (33 percent) saying they were 
"very involved." Blue-collar  supervisors were less likely to be involved in this  process 
than white-collar supervisors (35 percent of  white-collar supervisors compared to 28 
percent of  blue-collar supervisors reported being very involved).  When asked to what 
extent the supervisor's Federal  agency set reasonable affirmative employment goals  and 
made an effort to achieve them, over half (51  percent) reported that their agency made a 
"great deal  of effort," with an additional 30 percent saying their  agency had made 
"somewhat" of an effort on behalf of  such goals. 

When asked how many employees they had hired in the  past five years (or since they 
became a Federal Supervisor,  whichever was less), four out of five reported having  
hired at least one employee. Two out of five supervisors  (41 percent) reported having 
hired one to five  individuals, 17 percent hired six to ten, and one in  ten (11 percent) had 
hired more than 20 individuals  over that time period. Of those hiring, one in three  (32 
percent) reported having hired an individual with  a disability, with one in ten having 
hired three or more  individuals with disabilities during that time period. 

Use of Special Hiring Authorities 

Supervisors were asked about their familiarity with  and the frequency of their use of 
special hiring  authorities to facilitate recruitment and hiring of  individuals with 
disabilities in the Federal workforce.  More than one-half (56 percent) of those surveyed  
were "very" or "somewhat" familiar with the special  provisions for hiring disabled 
veterans (this provision  defines eligible veterans as those who are 30 percent  disabled or 
more). However, fewer respondents were  familiar with the provisions for hiring readers/ 
interpreters  or other personal assistants for persons with  disabilities (36 percent) or the 
special provision for  hiring people with cognitive disabilities or people  who have 
recovered from mental illness (30 percent). 

Blue-collar supervisors tended to be less familiar  with these special hiring authorities 
than white-collar  supervisors. Of those who had some familiarity with  special hiring 
authorities, three in ten (30 percent)  reported frequently or occasionally using the 
provisions  for disabled veterans, while one in four (25  percent) reported using the 
provision for hiring  readers or interpreters, and one in five (22 percent)  had used the 
special hiring authorities for people with  cognitive disabilities, significant physical 
disabilities,  or people who have recovered from mental illness. 

Here again, there was a difference in the frequency  of use of these hiring provisions 
between blue and  white-collar supervisors in the Federal workforce.  Blue-collar 
supervisors who were aware of the provisions  for hiring disabled veterans were 
significantly  more likely to have actually used them (43 percent  compared to 28 percent 
of white-collar supervisors). 

Supervisors with experience supervising one or more  employees with disabilities were 
much more likely to  report being very familiar with each of the special hiring  authorities 
and more likely to have used them when  familiar, compared to those without experience 
supervising  employees with disabilities. There is an interesting  continuum in the degree 
of familiarity with these  authorities, from those not supervising employees  with 
disabilities, supervising one or two employees  with a disability, and supervising three or 
more employees  with disabilities. As experience with the Supervision of a person with a 
disability increases, so does  familiarity with the Federal hiring authorities (see  Chart 1). 

Chart 1 

Supervisor Awareness of Federal Hiring Authorities, by Number of Employees with 
Disabilities Supervised 

Awareness of hiring authorities for hiring people with cognitive disabilities, significant 
physical disabilities, or people who have recovered from mental illness 
	Supervisors with no employees with disabilities: 3 percent
	Supervisors with 1 or 2 employees with disabilities: 7percent
	Supervisors with 3 or more employees with disabilities: 16 percent

For hiring readers/ inter-preters and other personal assistants for employees with 
disabilities 
No employees with disabilities: 6 percent
1 or 2 employees with disabilities: 12 percent
3 or more employees with disabilities: 29 percent

For hiring disabled veterans (30 percent disabled or more) 
No employees with disabilities: 17 percent
1 or 2 employees with disabilities: 27 percent
3 or more employees with disabilities: 48 percent

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of People with 
Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Chart 1

Pre-Employment Accommodations Made 

Those surveyed were asked about the changes they  had made for recruitment and pre-
employment screening  processes across four different types of accommodations,  
including changing questions asked in  interviews, making information accessible for a 
person  with a visual or learning impairment, making information  accessible for a 
hearing-impaired person, and  making interview locations accessible to people with  
physical disabilities (mobility impairments). Two out  of five (41 percent) had made all 
four accommodations,  while approximately a quarter (28 percent) had  not made any of 
the accommodations. Each of these  changes was made by approximately half of the  
supervisors surveyed (range: 53-60 percent). The  majority of the remainder indicated 
never having had  to make these changes because they had not been  requested. Less than 
two percent said they had been  unable to provide the accommodation. 

Of those supervisors who reported having made such  changes in the recruitment and pre-
employment  screening processes, the majority reported that making  such changes was 
easy or very easy. The area thought  to be the easiest to make an accommodation was  
making interview locations accessible to people with  physical disabilities, reported as 
easy or very easy by  nine out of ten respondents (91 percent) who had  made this change. 
Similarly, four out of five respondents  found changing questions asked in interviews to  
facilitate pre-employment screening for individuals  with disabilities to be easy or very 
easy (80 percent). 

Making information accessible for a person with a  visual or learning impairment was 
most difficult,  being reported as difficult or very difficult by approximately  one in four 
respondents (24 percent). Making  information accessible for a person with a hearing  
impairment was also seen as difficult, reported as  difficult or very difficult by 17 percent 
of respondents  with experience in making such changes. 

Familiarity with Interview Considerations and Accommodations 

Respondents were given a list of considerations in the  applicant interview process, and 
asked how familiar  they were with each (see Table 1). Almost three-quarters  of the 
respondents reported being familiar or very  familiar with framing questions to applicants 
about the  ability to perform specific job tasks rather than about  disability (72 percent), 
and knowing when to ask an  applicant about how she or he would perform specific  job 
tasks (71 percent). The areas where respondents  indicated the least familiarity were in 
accommodating  individuals with visual or hearing impairments, such  as accessing sign 
language interpreters, using a tele-typewriter  (TTY) or relay service to set up interviews,  
adapting print materials used in the interview (to large  print, diskette or Braille), or using 
a reader to assist a  person with a learning disability or visual impairment.  Another area 
in which there was a higher degree of  unfamiliarity was in knowing when to test for 
illegal  drugs, reported by approximately two out of five  supervisors (44 percent). 
Supervisors who had employees  with disabilities were significantly more familiar  (by 
ten percent or more) than those without experience  with each of the applicant 
interviewing issues,  except for "knowing when to test for illegal drugs." 

Table 1: 
Familiarity with Disability Employment Discrimination (ADA) Interview Considerations 
and Accommodations 
 
Three numbers follow each consideration.  They are the percentages for familiar or very 
familiar, then neither familiar or unfamiliar, than for unfamiliar or very unfamiliar.  
Framing questions to applicants about the ability to perform specific job tasks rather than 
about disability 72, 12, 16 
Knowing when to ask an applicant about how s/ he would perform specific job tasks 71 
13 16 
Restrictions on eliciting information about medical issues affecting applicant's health and 
safety on the job. 65 13 21 
Restrictions on obtaining medical examinations and medical history information 60 12 29 
Accessing sign language interpreters 49 13 37 
Knowing when to test for illegal drugs 43 13 44 
Using a teletypewriter (TTY) or relay service to set up interviews 38 11 50 
Adapting print materials used in the interview to large print, diskette, or Braille 36 14 50 
Using a reader to assist a person with a learning disability or visual impairment 35 14 51 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused" 
(5% or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of 
People with Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 1

There were also significant differences on these items  between blue and white-collar 
supervisors. Blue-collar  were significantly less familiar than white-collar  supervisors 
with the four accommodations for persons  with visual or hearing impairments. 

Supervisors Report on Accommodation Practices \

Federal supervisors surveyed were asked a series of  questions relating to their practices 
in making accommodations  for applicants and employees with disabilities.  A summary 
of the supervisors' experience with  accommodation is presented in Appendix C. Several  
questions were directed toward finding out about how  accommodation is approached by 
the agency, asking  whether or not there was a formal process for handling  reasonable 
accommodation requests by employees  with disabilities, and who makes the final 
decision  regarding the provision of an accommodation. The  supervisors were also asked 
about their experience  with accommodations over the past five years, including  the 
number of people they supervised and the  types of disabilities these supervisees had. In 
addition,  the survey asked about the supervisors' experience  with making specific 
accommodations to meet  the needs of employees with disabilities. 

The Accommodation Process 

More than three-quarters (78 percent) of those responding  to this supervisor survey 
reported that their agency  had a formal process for handling accommodation  requests. 
When asked who makes the final decision on  the provision of an accommodation, the 
most common  response was that the respondent as the supervisor, in  consultation with 
their immediate supervisor, made  this decision (29 percent). One out of five respondents  
indicated that they as the immediate supervisor of the  employee made the decision (21 
percent), or another  manager or director did so (20 percent). Least often  making the 
final decision on the provision of an  accommodation (two percent of respondents or less)  
was the Disability Service Office, occupational safety/  medical clinic staff, safety/ 
ergonomic staff, the agencies'  Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) staff, legal counsel  
(internal or external), or disability management/ benefits  staff (see Appendix C, 
Respondent Demographics).  Supervisors with experience supervising one or more  
employees with disabilities were twice as likely to report  that they, as the immediate 
supervisor, made/ would  make the final accommodation decision, than those  without 
experience (26 percent compared to 13 per-cent).  Those without such experience were 
more likely  to say the final decision would fall to another manager/  director (25 percent 
compared to 17 percent). 

Supervisor Experience Making Accommodations 

To get a sense of the number of accommodation  requests made to the supervisors 
surveyed, an initial  question asked how many accommodation requests  had been 
received by the supervisors responding to  the survey over the past five years (or their 
tenure as  a Federal supervisor, whichever was less). In terms of  their own experience in 
dealing directly with accommodation  requests, half (50 percent) of the supervisors  had 
received at least one accommodation request  over the past five years. Slightly over a 
third (36  percent) had received one to three requests, one in  ten (11 percent) had 
received four to ten requests,  and only four percent received more than ten re-quests.  Six 
supervisors reported receiving over 40  requests, which were often multiple 
accommodations  for a single individual (i.e. sign language interpreters  at each staff 
meeting for a deaf employee). 

Three out of five supervisors (60 percent) reported  supervising employees with 
disabilities during the last  five years. Specifically, 40 percent reported supervising  one 
or two employees with disabilities, 11 percent  reported three or four, with the remaining 
nine percent  reporting five or more employees with disabilities  (40 percent reported no 
employees with disabilities).  Overall, nearly two thirds (64 percent) of the supervisors  
surveyed had supervised at least one employee( s)  with a disability and/ or had received 
at least one  accommodation request over the past five years or  their tenure as a Federal 
supervisor (whichever was  less). 

Supervisors were also asked which types of people with  disabilities they supervised, 
classifying the disabilities  according to the Equal Employment Opportunity  
Commission (EEOC) targeted disability categories. *6 

Over half (56 percent) of the supervisors had supervised  at least one employee with an 
EEOC targeted  disability. It is interesting to note the breadth of  experience the 
respondents had with different types  of disabilities. About one in five (22 percent) had  
experience in supervising a person with one type of  EEOC targeted disability, 14 percent 
had experience  with two, and 18 percent had experience supervising  individual( s) with 
three or more types of targeted  disabilities. The four types of disabilities most often  
noted by the supervisors were musculoskeletal disorders  (i.e. back, repetitive motion 
injuries, etc.) (28 per-cent),  hearing impairment (20 percent), visual impairment  (19 
percent) and genetic/ physical/ neurological  conditions affecting limbs and/ or spine (19 
percent)  (see Appendix C). Differences were found between  blue and white-collar 
supervisors in certain types of  disabilities. Specifically, white-collar supervisors were  
more likely to have supervised a person with a visual  impairment, or with a genetic/ 
physical/ neurological  conditions. Blue-collar supervisors were more likely to  have 
supervised in their labor force individuals with  mental retardation and missing 
extremities. 

Kinds of Accommodations Made 

Respondents were asked if they or their agency had  made accommodations for an 
employee they supervised.  Three quarters of the respondents indicated  that at least one 
accommodation had been made for  an employee they supervised. It is interesting to note  
that this is a higher proportion than those reporting  receiving accommodation requests 
(50 percent). This  difference may be due to the fact that these accommodation  questions 
were not limited to the past five  years and also include accommodations made without  
the employee making a request. Nearly half of all  supervisors surveyed (49 percent), 
showed consider-able  breadth of experience, having made four or more  different types 
of accommodations of the 11 asked  about in the survey (see Table 2). The only 
individual  accommodation that was made by over half the  supervisors (53 percent) was 
that of advocating to  make existing facilities accessible to employees with  disabilities, 
such as restrooms, door entrances, hall-ways,  etc. Almost half (48 percent) of the 
responding  supervisors reported modifying a work environment  (such as by purchasing 
an orthopedic chair, lowering a  desk, etc.). Fewer than one in five supervisors reported  
making the accommodations of providing a job coach,  or reassignment to vacant 
positions (each by 17  percent of respondents). The vast majority of those  supervisors 
who had not made a specific accommodation  responded they did not do so because they 
"never  needed to." Typically, less than one percent of the  supervisors reported they were 
"not able to" provide  an accommodation, with two percent reporting being  unable to 
provide "reassignment to vacant positions." 

Table 2: 
Accommodations Made for Employees With Disabilities 

Three numbers follow each accommodation listed.  They are the percentages of 
supervisors who said "yes," said "no, not able to" or said they "never needed to make this 
accommodation".  A double dash (--) indicates less than one percent.

Advocated to make existing facilities accessible to employees with disabilities 
(restrooms, door entrances, hallways, etc) 53 -- 47 
Modified work environment (orthopedic chair, lower desk, etc.) 48 -- 52 
Acquired or modified equipment or devices 47 -- 52 
Restructured jobs or modified work hours 45 -- 54 
Made parking or transportation accommodations 41 -- 58 
Provided written job instructions 31 -- 69 
Changed supervisory methods 29 -- 0 
Provided qualified readers or interpreters (including personal assistants) 27 -- 73 
Acquired or modified training materials 20 -- 79 
Made reassignment to vacant positions 17 2 81 
Provided a job coach 17 -- 82 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused"( 
5% or less of total responses). 
-- means less than one percent. 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of 
People with Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 
End of Table 2

There were several interesting and statistically significant  differences between white-
collar and blue-collar  supervisors in the use of three accommodations. Blue-collar  
supervisors were more likely to report using  reassignment to a vacant position as an 
accommodation,  whereas a higher number of white-collar supervisors  reported use of 
the accommodations of acquiring  and modifying equipment or devices than blue-collar  
supervisors. 

Accommodation Resources Used and Found Helpful 

Supervisors were asked about their use of 14 specific  accommodation resources. Nearly 
three out of five had  used at least one of these 14 resources. The majority  of those who 
used resources utilized multiple sources,  with 36 percent reporting having used one or 
two, 34  percent used three or four, and 31 percent used five  or more of the 14 resources. 
The most commonly used  resources included the Human Resource personnel at  the 
central (30 percent) and servicing/ subagency level  (28 percent), as well as the employee 
assistance  program (30 percent) and the safety/ ergonomics staff  (28 percent) (see Table 
3). 

Table 3. 
Resources Used for Accommodation Assistance 

Numbers after each resource are percentages of supervisors who said that they had 
1) used the resource, 2) Not used it because they were not aware of it, 3) Not used it 
because it was not needed, and 4) If they did use it, found it helpful.

Central human resource personnel (Department wide) 30 15 56 79 
Employee Assistance Program 30 4 67 74 
Servicing human resource personnel (sub-agency or unit level) 28 18 54 83 
Safety/ ergonomic staff 28 19 53 84 
EEO office 23 5 73 75 
Occupational health/ medical clinic staff 22 16 62 83 
Disability management/ benefits staff 14 32 54 83 
External health care provider 13 16 70 57 
State vocational rehabilitation agencies 9 16 74 81 
Disabilities Services Office (i. e. CAP, COAST, TARGET Center) 8 484483 
Disabled Employee Advisory Group 6 46 48 84 
Local independent living centers or other disability organizations 5 187774 
Selective Placement Coordinator 5 42 53 81 
Job Accommodation Network (toll-free number) 3 475083 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001 less responses of "don't know/ refused" (5% 
or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 
Helpfulness rated on a 1-5 scale with 1 being very helpful and 5= not at all helpful  
(Helpful= 1,2 Undecided= 3 Not Helpful= 4,5.) 

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of 
People with Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 3

If a resource was not used, three options were avail-able:  "not aware of," "aware but not 
needed" and  "aware but not helpful." "Aware but not helpful" was  reported by fewer 
than one percent of respondents. Of  special interest is that nearly half (42 -48 percent)  of 
the supervisors were not aware of the following  resources: the Job Accommodation 
Network (JAN),  disabilities services office (e. g., CAP, COAST, TARGET  center), 
disabled employee advisory groups, and  selective placement coordinators. White-collar 
supervisors  were significantly less likely than blue-collar  supervisors to be aware of the 
safety/ ergonomics staff  for accommodation assistance (79 percent compared  to 91 
percent), but were more likely to be aware of  State Vocational Rehabilitation agencies 
than the  blue-collar supervisors (86 percent compared to 74  percent). Interestingly, 
supervisors with experience  supervising employees with disabilities were not  
significantly more familiar with these accommodations  than those who had not 
supervised any employees  with disabilities. However, they were more aware than  those 
without experience of the following resources:  Independent Living Centers (87 percent 
compared to  79 percent), State Vocational Rehabilitation agencies  (85 percent compared 
to 78 percent) and external  health care (87 percent compared to 81 percent) as  resources. 

Supervisors were asked how helpful the resources were  if they had used them. Virtually 
all of the resources  were considered to be helpful, with at least three  quarters of the 
"users" rating them at four or five  (with five being very helpful and one being not  
helpful at all). The single exception was external  health providers, which only 57 percent 
found as  helpful and nearly one of five (19 percent) said were  "not helpful." 

Opportunities for Promotion/ Training for People with Disabilities 

Supervisors were asked what they see as the continuing  barriers to the hiring and 
advancement of people  with disabilities, and ways to address these barriers.  In addition, 
they were asked about the various means  they used to facilitate access to training and 
other  benefits of employment for employees with disabilities. 

Barriers to Hiring and Promotion of People with Disabilities 

Respondents were presented with seven possible barriers  to the employment and 
advancement of people with  disabilities. No respondent indicated that there were no  
barriers for people with disabilities; all felt that one  or more of the listed barriers were in 
fact a problem  (See Chart 2). The most frequently noted barriers were  felt to be in the 
work environment or in the training  or work experience of the person with the disability. 


Chart 2 
Barriers to Employment or Advancement of People with Disabilities 

Numbers after each barrier are percent of supervisors who indicated this specific option 
was a barrier to employment or advancement for people with disabilities.

Cost of training: 8%
Additional cost of surpervision:10% 
Cost of accommodations 11% 
Lack of established policy/ procedures 17% 
Additional travel costs 17% 
Attitudes/ stereotypes 20% 
Accommodation not provided when needed 21% 
A supervisor's knowledge of which accommodation to make 23% 
Lack of requisite skills and training (of the person with a disability) 43% 
Lack of related experience ( of the person with a disability) 48% 
Other 15% 

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of 
People with Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 
Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused" 
(5% or less of total responses). 

End of Chart 2

Respondents indicated that there were significant  barriers for people with disabilities in 
the work  environment, including a supervisor's knowledge of  which accommodations to 
make (23 percent),accommodations  not being provided when needed (21  percent), and 
attitudes and stereotypes about people  with disabilities (20 percent). Respondents also  
identified barriers that result from inadequacies in the  individual with a disability's 
preparation for employment.  These potential barriers to employment and  advancement 
were a lack of related experience in the  person with a disability (48 percent) and a lack 
of  requisite skills and training in the person with a  disability (43 percent). Interestingly, 
cost of accommodations  (11 percent), additional cost of supervision  (10 percent) and the 
cost of training (8 percent) were  least likely to be seen as remaining barriers to 
employment  for people with disabilities. Surprisingly,  the perception of these barriers 
was not significantly  different between supervisors with experience supervising  
employees with disabilities and supervisors  without employees with disabilities. 

Possible Ways to Reduce Barriers in the Workplace  Supervisors were also asked their 
perceptions of the  degree of effectiveness of eleven different items in  reducing barriers 
to employment or advancement  for persons with disabilities within their respective  
agencies (See Table 4). The majority (over 50 percent)  reported all eleven items would 
be effective (rated as  1 or 2 on a five point scale where 1 is "very effective"  and 5 is 
"very ineffective"). More than four out of five  supervisors reported that visible top 
management  commitment (85 percent) and skills training for  employees with disabilities 
(83 percent) would be  effective means of barrier reduction. Other means  considered 
highly effective include mentoring (78  percent), staff training (76 percent), and on-site  
consultation or technical assistance (76 percent). 


Table 4. 
Means to Reduce Barriers to Employment 

The number after each possible means of barrier reduction is the percent of supervisors 
considering it effective

Visible top management commitment 85% 
Skills training for employees with disabilities 83 
Mentoring 78 
Staff training 76 
On-site consultation or technical assistance 76 
Changing co-worker/ supervisor attitudes towards persons with disabilities 69 
Special budget allocation/ centralized accommodation fund 67 
Development and input from a disability advisory group 62 
Include affirmative action and accommodation items for persons with disabilities 
in supervisor performance appraisals 60 
Departmental reward/ recognition (i.e. A certificate acknowledging outstanding 
performance) 59 
Short-term outside assistance with job supervision (e. g. outside job coach) 57 


Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused" 
(5% or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 
Effectiveness rated 1= Very effective to 5= Very ineffective 
% Effective= 1 & 2. 

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of 
People with Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 4

There was a significant difference between blue and  white-collar supervisors in the 
perceived effectiveness  of three items: development and input from a Disability  
Advisory Committee, including affirmative action  and accommodation items for persons 
with disabilities  in supervisor performance appraisals, and departmental  reward/ 
recognition (such as a certificate acknowledging  outstanding performance). In all three 
items,  blue-collar supervisors perceived these as significantly  more effective than white-
collar supervisors did by 12  to 15 percent. 

Supervisors were also asked if they had used any of  three items (wheelchair access, 
communication access  for those with vision impairments, and communication  access for 
those with hearing impairments) to ensure  that people with disabilities they supervised 
would  have access to meetings, promotional and social  opportunities. The most often 
used was wheelchair  access, with three of five respondents (61 percent)  indicating use 
of this. Less frequently reported was  communication access for the deaf or hard of 
hearing  (45 percent) and communication access for persons  with visual or learning 
disabilities (38 percent). 

Supervisor Experience in Resolving Disability Discrimination Issues 

Supervisors were asked several questions relating to  their experience with any disability 
discrimination  issues arising in their workplace. Specifically, they  were asked whether 
their agency had a grievance or  dispute resolution process to deal with disability and  
accommodation issues, and whether they as a Federal  supervisor had ever experienced a 
formal disability  complaint. In addition, they were asked the degree of  ease or difficulty 
with which they could use a number  of resources and approaches, should an 
accommodation  dispute arise. 

Supervisor Experience of Disability Discrimination Claims 

Almost nine in ten responding supervisors (87 percent)  reported that their agency had a 
grievance or dispute  resolution process to deal with disability and accommodation  
issues. Supervisors surveyed were presented with  a list of seven possible specific 
disability claims that  could be filed under disability civil rights legislation,  including 
wrongful discharge, failure to provide  reasonable accommodation, failure to hire, 
harassment,  unfair discipline, failure to promote, and suspension.  Eighty-eight percent 
of respondents had never had  a claim filed against them. Less than five percent  reported 
any one individual specific claim type except  for one. A claim of failure to provide 
reasonable  accommodation was reported as having been experienced  by seven percent 
of supervisors surveyed. 

Approaches and Resources Used to Resolve Accommodation Disputes 

Supervisors were presented with five possible resources  or approaches to dealing with an 
accommodation  dispute, should one arise, and asked how easy or  difficult using this 
approach would be for them. The  five resources or approaches presented were as 
follows:  discussing accommodation needs with the individual;  accessing a resource 
person to help with accommodation  issues (HR personnel, EEO personnel, health and  
safety personnel, ergonomics personnel, Employee  Relations personnel, etc.); having 
access to a person  trained in alternative dispute resolution (ADR); effectively  using the 
existing dispute/ complaint resolution  process; getting sufficient training on dispute 
resolution  approaches; and determining the most appropriate  dispute resolution process. 
Approximately three-quarters  or more of the individuals reported that using each  
accommodation dispute approach or resource would  be easy. Discussing accommodation 
needs with the  individual with a disability  was seen as the least difficult  approach to 
use, with nine  out of ten of respondents (92  percent) seeing this as easy  to do. 
Determining the most  appropriate dispute resolution  process was seen as modestly  
more difficult, with approximately  three out of four (73  percent) respondents seeing  this 
as an easy approach to  resolving an accommodation  dispute should one arise. 

The supervisors were also  presented with 12 possible  resources that could be used  to 
help resolve disability  employment civil rights issues  (see Table 5). Less than half  of 
the respondents used any  single resource for these  purposes. The resources used  by the 
largest number of  supervisors included: the HR  Staff/ Employee Relations (44  percent), 
the agency's Equal  Employment Opportunity 


Table 5: 
Resources Used to Help Resolve ADA Issues 

Numbers following each resource are 1) the percentage of supervisors who had utilized 
that resource, and 2) the percentage who had used it who found it helpful.

HR Staff/ Employee Relations 44% 82% 
Your agency's EEO office 33 77 
Your safety/ ergonomics staff 33 85 
Union representative 25 60 
Agency legal counsel 23 85 
Disability management/ benefits staff 19 78 
State Vocational Rehabilitation agencies, DBTACs, ILCs, other disability organizations 
16 88 
U. S. EEOC 16 78 
Other Federal agencies or professional society or business agency (eg OPM, MSPB, 
SHRM, IPMA) 14 81 
Dispute resolution center/ mediator 11 71 
Disabilities Services Office 8 79 
Selective Placement Coordinator 8 77 
Job Accommodation Network (toll-free number) 4 83 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused" 
(5% or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of 
People with Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 5

There was a significant difference between white and  blue-collar supervisors on two 
items, with more white-collar  supervisors utilizing State Vocational Rehabilitation  
services (18 percent) compared to blue-collar  supervisors (11 percent). There was also a 
significant  difference between blue and white-collar supervisors  on the use of legal 
counsel. One in four white-collar  supervisors reported having used this resource (25  
percent), compared with 14 percent of blue-collar  supervisors. The three least often used 
resources included:  the Disabilities Services Office (8 percent), the  Selective Placement 
Coordinator (8 percent), and the  Job Accommodation Network (4 percent). No 
differences  were found between supervisors with experience  with employees with 
disabilities and those without  this experience in their use of these resources. 

Supervisors were also asked to rate the degree of helpfulness  of those of the 12 resources 
they had used. All  the resources were seen as helpful by more than three-quarters  of 
their users with the exception of the dispute  resolution center/ mediator (71 percent 
found it  helpful), and the union representative (60 percent). 

Training on Civil Rights- Related Topics 

A number of questions were asked to determine the  extent of training that supervisors 
received on eleven  specific topics related to the Americans with Disabilities  Act (ADA) 
and the Rehabilitation Act employment  provisions. Supervisors were also asked whether 
they  would like more information on each of these topics.  Questions were also asked to 
get more specific information  about the extent of training, how it was  provided, the 
medium most often used to impart  information, and their degree of helpfulness. Finally,  
respondents were asked how effective each of four  different incentives would be in 
encouraging disability  nondiscriminatory related training (including the ADA,  disability 
employment, Rehabilitation Act, EEOC  Guidance, and 508 compliance). 

Disability Civil Rights Training Received 

More than nine out of ten supervisors (92 percent)  were trained in at least one of the 
eleven disability  employment civil rights training areas asked about,  and more than half 
had received training in eight of  the eleven topics (see Table 6). On average, white-collar  
supervisors had received training in six of the  eleven civil rights topic areas as compared 
to slightly  less than five for the blue-collar supervisors. The  topics most often reported 
as the focus of training (by  two-thirds to three-quarters of respondents) were non-
discrimination  in the disciplinary process or termination  (72 percent), non-
discriminatory recruitment and  hiring practices (71 percent), and disability awareness  
and/ or sensitivity training (71 percent). The three  areas in which supervisors had 
received comparatively  less training were Section 508 training (28 percent),  the special 
appointing/ hiring authorities (26 per-cent),  and accommodation for persons with mental 
or  psychiatric disabilities (25 percent). 


Table 6. Training on ADA and Rehabilitation 
Act-Related Topics by Collar 


Non-discrimination in the disciplinary process or termination 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 72
	Blue Collar: 63
	White Collar: 74
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 43
	Blue Collar: 59
	White Collar: 39
	Significance Testing? *

Non-discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 71
	Blue Collar:60
	White Collar:74
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors:48
	Blue Collar:59
	White Collar:45
	Significance Testing? *

Disability awareness and/ or sensitivity training 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 71
	Blue Collar: 62
	White Collar: 73
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 45
	Blue Collar: 56
	White Collar: 43
	Significance Testing?  *

Confidentiality requirements of medical information 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 67
	Blue Collar: 61
	White Collar: 68
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 42
	Blue Collar: 53
	White Collar: 40
	Significance Testing?  *

Equal access in promotional opportunities & training 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 60
	Blue Collar: 48
	White Collar: 63
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 51
	Blue Collar: 66
	White Collar: 48
	Significance Testing? *

Conflict resolution in the accommodation process 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 57
	Blue Collar: 61
	White Collar: 56
	Significance testing? 
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 50
	Blue Collar: 54
	White Collar: 49
	Significance Testing? 

The accommodation process 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors:  55
	Blue Collar: 38
	White Collar: 59
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 58
	Blue Collar: 70
	White Collar: 56
	Significance Testing? *

Defining essential job functions 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 53
	Blue Collar: 33
	White Collar: 58
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 49
	Blue Collar: 64
	White Collar: 46
	Significance Testing? *

Section 508 training 28 16 31 * 57 62 56 * 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 28
	Blue Collar: 26
	White Collar: 31
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 57
	Blue Collar: 62
	White Collar: 56
	Significance Testing? 

The special appointing/ hiring authorities 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 
	Blue Collar:
	White Collar:
	Significance testing?
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors:
	Blue Collar:
	White Collar:
	Significance Testing? *

Accommodation for mental disabilities 
Received Training on this topic
	All Supervisors: 25
	Blue Collar: 16
	White Collar: 27
	Significance testing? *
More information on this topic?
	All Supervisors: 63
	Blue Collar: 71
	White Collar: 61
	Significance Testing? *

Note: Percent of all valid responses; 1001 for total, 810 for white-collar, and 191 for 
blue-collar less responses of "don't know/ refused"( 5% or less of total responses). 

Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

*Chi-square test of association, comparing blue vs. white collar supervisors statistically 
significant at the p²0.05 level. 

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of 
People with Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 6

Supervisors who had employees with disabilities were  significantly more likely to have 
received training in  these six areas: non-discriminatory recruitment and  hiring (75 
percent for supervisors with experience  compared to 65 percent for those without), the  
accommodation process (61 percent compared to 47  percent), accommodation for mental 
disabilities (28  percent compared to 21 percent), defining essential  job functions (57 
percent compared to 48 percent),  disability awareness/ sensitivity training (75 percent  
compared to 65 percent) and Section 508 (32 percent  compared to 22 percent). 

Approximately four out of five (81 percent) supervisors  surveyed indicated that they had 
received some  formal training on the ADA or Rehabilitation Act, with  one-third (35 
percent) indicating that they had 16 or  more hours of training. White-collar supervisors 
were  significantly more likely to have received training in  each of the topic areas, 
except for conflict resolution  in the accommodation process. Supervisors with  
experience supervising three or more employees with  disabilities reported 15 training 
hours on average,  compared to 12 hours for those with one or two  disabled employees 
and nine training hours for those  with no experience. 

Approximately four in five supervisors reported that  the training on ADA and 
Rehabilitation Act topics they  received as a Federal supervisor was provided as a part  of 
a general supervisory/ management (87 percent) or  employment discrimination or 
diversity training (83  percent). The next most commonly cited ways training  had been 
provided was as a specialized focus on  disability provided by Federal government staff  
experts (64 percent), or as a specialized focus on  disability by an external consultant (41 
percent).  Supervisors of employees with disabilities were more  likely to have received 
training from Federal Government  staff experts (68 percent compared to 58 per-cent)  
and from external consultants (44 percent  compared to 36 percent) than those who had 
not had  experience with employees with disabilities. 

The topics on which the majority of supervisors (50  percent or more) indicated wanting 
more information  were as follows (in descending order of interest):  special appointing/ 
hiring authorities, accommodations  for persons with mental or psychiatric disabilities, 
the  accommodation process, Section 508 training, and  equal access in promotional 
opportunities and training.  Blue-collar supervisors were more likely than  white-collar 
supervisors to express interest in additional  information (significantly so in eight of the  
eleven areas). This perhaps reflects a desire to make  up for the fact that they had 
received less training  than their white-collar supervisor counterparts. 

Incentives to Encourage Disability-Related Training 

The supervisors were asked how effective each of a  number of incentives would be in 
encouraging attendance  at disability nondiscrimination related training  (including 
Americans with Disabilities Act topics,  disability employment, Rehabilitation Act, 
EEOC  Guidance, and Section 508 compliance). The incentive  seen as most effective 
was making ADA/ disability  employment a mandatory element of management  training, 
selected by almost four out of five respondents  (79 percent). The next most often 
selected  incentives were paying ADA training costs (66 percent),  and making ADA 
training available on the Internet  (56 percent). Departmental reward or recognition for  
receiving training was seen as the least effective of  the four alternatives, but still seen as 
effective by  over two out of five respondents (44 percent marked it  as effective). 
Interestingly, blue-collar supervisors  were significantly more likely to view departmental  
reward or recognition as effective (60 percent) than  white-collar supervisors (40 
percent). 

Accommodation Informational and Organizational Resources Used 

Those surveyed were also asked about the resources  that they used to address disability 
civil rights-related  issues, across seven alternatives, including: print or  video materials, 
on-site consultation/ training, web  sites/ listservs/ EEOC homepage, organizational 
news-letters,  telephone consultation/ information hotlines,  government-sponsored 
programs (i.e. IDEAS, FOSE),  and employee-sponsored disability organizations in  the 
supervisor's department or agency. The resources  reported most often used were video 
materials (re-ported  as used by 42 percent of respondents) and on-site  consultation/ 
training (34 percent). Web sites/  listservs/ EEOC homepage, organizational newsletters,  
telephone consultation/ information hotlines were  used by approximately one in five 
respondents. Least-often  used were government-sponsored programs (17  percent) and 
employee-sponsored disability organizations  (13 percent). The lack of use of these 
particular  resources may have been a function of lack of aware-ness  of them, as one in 
three respondents or more  indicated that they were not aware of either of these  
resources. 

Those surveyed were also asked about the helpfulness  of each resource they had used to 
address disability  civil rights-related issues. All the resources were seen  as helpful by 
the majority of those who used them.  The three resources most often viewed as helpful 
were  telephone consultations/ information hotlines (seen as  helpful by 85 percent of 
respondents who had used  them), on-site consultation/ training (84 percent), and  web 
sites/ listservs/ EEOC homepage (81 percent). 

Disability Management and Workplace Accommodation 

Disability management is a strategy that seeks to  prevent disability from occurring in the 
workplace  or, failing that, supports early intervention after  the onset of a disability, in a 
way that promotes an  organizational commitment to continued employment  for 
employees with functional work limitation. The  goal of disability management is 
successful job  maintenance, or facilitation of prompt return to work,  for people with 
disabilities. *7 

Fifty-four percent of respondents reported that their  agency has a formal disability 
management or return  to work program (one with written policies and  procedures), with 
an additional 12 percent having an  informal program. Blue-collar supervisors were 
significantly  more likely to be aware of a program (formal or  informal), than white-
collar supervisors. 

Respondents whose agencies have either formal or  informal disability management 
programs indicated  that these programs contribute "a great deal" to  implementation of 
disability nondiscrimination or civil  rights laws, by either raising awareness of the 
importance  of medical confidentiality (60 percent), raising  acceptance of employees 
with disabilities (39 per-cent),  raising supervisor awareness of the accommodation 
process (36 percent), and providing an organizational  structure for accommodations (31 
percent). 

Awareness of and Implementation to Date of Presidential Orders 

Supervisors were queried about their perceptions of  implementation to date of several 
Presidential Orders  that relate to more effective recruitment and retention  for individuals 
with disabilities in the Federal workforce.  Inquiry was also made about other services 
and supports  that would facilitate effective implementation of these  equal employment 
opportunity provisions. Specifically,  the areas which were asked about were as follows: 
the  services/ supports that will facilitate implementation  of Section 508 of the 
Rehabilitation Act (508 requires  that electronic and information technology developed,  
procured, maintained, or used by the Federal government  be accessible to people with 
disabilities);  dedication of existing or development of new positions  to facilitate off-site 
or telework for individuals with  disabilities and general awareness of these provisions;  
awareness of the initiative of the Federal government  to hire 100,000 employees with 
disabilities over a five  year period; the specific agency's plan to implement  this order to 
hire employees with disabilities; and  supervisor knowledge of whether written 
procedures to  facilitate the provision of reasonable accommodation  were in place and 
being implemented in their respective  agencies. In addition, supervisors were asked to  
what extent the new accommodation procedures  influence their own supervisory 
practice. 

Implementation of Section 508 

As mentioned above, Section 508 requires that electronic  and information technology 
developed, pro-cured,  maintained, or used by the Federal government  be accessible to 
people with disabilities. *8 The Center  for Information Technology Accommodation 
(CITA) in  the U. S. General Services Administration's Office of  Government-wide 
Policy has been charged with the  task of educating Federal employees and building the  
infrastructure necessary to support Section 508  implementation. 

Those surveyed were asked how helpful each of five  possible resources or services might 
be to them as  supervisors in implementing the technology nondiscrimination  
requirements of Section 508. The five  resources were as follows: centralized technology  
procurement which screens for these criteria, training  procurement specialists in Section 
508 requirements,  centralized technical assistance on technology accessibility  issues, 
unit specific expertise/ technical  assistance on technology accessibility issues, and access  
to the technical staff within the supervisor's agency  (i.e. Chief Information Officer 
(CIO)/ Help Desk). All of  these items were perceived as helpful by at least seven  out of 
ten respondents. Those items seen as most  helpful were access to the technical assistance 
staff  within the given supervisor's agency (79 percent),  centralized technical assistance 
on technology accessibility  issues (77 percent), and training procurement  specialists in 
Section 508 requirements (76 percent). 

Off-site/ Telework for Federal Employees with Disabilities 

Another Executive Order deals with the identification  or development of home-based, 
off-site, or telework  opportunities for individuals with disabilities in the  Federal 
workforce. This survey has afforded an opportunity  to explore the potential of this 
initiative and  its ease of implementation from the supervisors'  perspective. Specifically, 
supervisors were asked if  they currently had any full-time employees who  worked 
primarily from home or from another off-site  location, and whether any of the existing 
office-based  positions that they currently supervise could be  relocated to home-based or 
other off-site facilities,  either on a full-time basis or split between home and  office-
based location in a given week. In addition,  these supervisors were asked how easy or 
difficult it  would be for them to develop full-time positions that  would be performed 
either exclusively at home or split  between home and on-site locations. Significant  
differences in responses were found throughout these  questions between white and blue-
collar supervisors. 

Survey respondents were asked about their awareness  of the Federal initiative regarding 
telecommuting/  telework for individuals for significant disabilities.  Nearly 40 percent 
were aware of this provision. White-collar  supervisors were significantly more likely to 
be  aware of this initiative (41 percent), compared to  blue-collar supervisors (27 percent). 
Supervisors who  had experience supervising disabled employees were  more likely to 
report awareness of this initiative (42  percent), compared to those without experience (32  
percent). 

Overall, thirteen percent of the respondents indicated  they currently supervise full-time 
employees who work  primarily from home or another off-site location.  White-collar 
supervisors, however, were significantly  more likely to have this situation than their 
blue-collar  supervisors counterparts (16 percent compared  to three percent). 

These supervisors were also asked whether, in their  opinion, any of the office-based 
positions that they  currently supervise could be relocated to home-based  or other off-site 
facilities, either on a full-time basis  or split between home and office-based locations in  
a given week. Approximately three out of five (58  percent) of respondents indicated that 
they would  be able, in their opinion, to take positions that they  currently supervised and 
split them between home or  off-site and in-office functions during a given week.  
Supervisors said that split time between off-site and  on-site positions was more feasible 
than full-time off  site, with only one in three supervisors (32 percent)  responding 
affirmatively to the full-time option. It is  important to note that blue-collar supervisors 
were far  less likely than white-collar supervisors to view either  of these options as being 
feasible given their respective  workforces. Only one in seven (14 percent) blue-collar  
supervisors saw split positions as a possibility,  and only six percent believed it would be 
possible to  relocate full-time positions. Supervisors of employees  with disabilities were 
more likely to say they would  be able to make current positions home-based (37  percent 
compared to 25 percent) or split home-office  positions (64 percent compared to 50 
percent) and  develop new positions more easily. 

Supervisors were also asked how easy or difficult it  would be to develop such positions. 
Again, respondents indicated that developing jobs that were split  between home and 
office would be easier than trying  to create full-time off site positions (32 percent saying  
very easy/ easy for split time, compared to 14 percent  for full-time at home). White-
collar supervisors were  significantly more likely to view the development of  these 
positions as easy or very easy, whether full-time  at home or split between home and 
office, than were  blue-collar supervisors. Supervisors with employees  with disabilities 
were also more likely to view developing  positions to work at home as easier, than those 
who  were not supervising an employee with a disability.  Over two thirds (68 percent) of 
the blue-collar supervisors  and a quarter (24 percent) of the white-collar  supervisors said 
they had no relevant full time off site  positions that they could develop (65 percent and 
14  percent respectively regarding split positions). 

An effort was also made in this survey to identify  which structures and supports might 
best facilitate  the redesign of existing positions or creation of new  ones that could be 
home-based or telework employment  opportunities for people with disabilities.  
Specifically, those who indicated they had potential  positions (79 percent of the 1,001 
supervisors surveyed)  were asked to make a judgment about the  degree of helpfulness of 
seven different possible  supports to supervision of telework employees, as  follows: off-
site technology support; guidelines for  performance assessment of off-site workers; 
formal  flexi-place agreement between off-site employee and  supervisor; training for 
supervisors of off-site workers;  initial and ongoing training for off-site workers;  having 
guidelines for the design of off-site work;  guidelines for supervision of off-site workers; 
and  training for coworkers of off-site workers. 

In general, the majority of supervisors (57 percent or  more) rated all of these possible 
structures or supports  for off-site work as helpful (see Table 7). The three  rated as most 
helpful were off-site technology support  (75 percent), guidelines for performance 
assessment  of off-site workers (71 percent), and formal flexi-place  agreements between 
off-site employees and supervisors  (71 percent). Again, there was a significant  
difference in the perceptions of white and blue-collar  supervisors about the potential 
helpfulness of these,  with white-collar supervisors seeing them as significantly  more 
helpful than blue-collar supervisors, with  a 20-30 percent difference on each individual 
item. 


Table 7. Helpfulness of resources in supporting home-based 

Numbers following each resource are 1) percent of all supervisors who found the 
resource helpful, 2) percent of blue-collar supervisors who did so, and 3) percent of white 
collar supervisors who did so.

Helpfulness rated on a 1-5 scale with 1= very helpful and 5= not at all helpful Helpful= 
1,2. *Chi-square test of association, comparing Blue vs. White collar respondents 
statistically significant at the p< 0.05 level. 

Off-site technology support 75% 48% 78% * 
Guidelines for performance assessment of off-site workers 71 43 75 * 
Formal flexiplace agreement between off-site employee and supervisor 71 47 74 * 
Training for supervisors of off-site workers 66 39 70 * 
Initial and ongoing training for off-site workers 66 45 68 * 
Guidelines for the design of off-site work 66 45 68 * 
Guidelines for supervision of off-site workers 65 30 69 * 
Training for coworkers of off-site workers 57 39 59 * 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; 1001 for Total, 810 for white-collar, and 191 for 
blue-collar less responses of "don't know/ refused" (5% or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

Source: Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in Employment of 
People with Disabilities. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities/ Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 7

The survey respondents were also asked about how  easy or difficult it would be to 
accommodate an  individual with a chronic illness or disability (for  example, someone 
who has cancer treatment, physical  therapy, dialysis, or a mobility impairment) with the  
ability to work at home for one to two days each week  or intermittently. Approximately 
half of the responding  white-collar supervisors (47 percent) indicated  that it would be 
easy to provide this accommodation,  compared to less than six percent of the blue-collar  
supervisors. The majority of the blue-collar supervisors  (57 percent) indicated that they 
had no positions in  which this accommodation would be possible (com- pared to 11 
percent of the white-collar supervisors),  with nearly a quarter (24 percent) responding it 
would  be very difficult (compared to 14 percent of the  white-collar supervisors). As 
expected, supervisors  who had experience with employees with disabilities  viewed 
making this accommodation as easier than  those who were inexperienced (44 percent 
said it  would be very easy/ easy compared to 32 percent of  those not supervising an 
employee with a disability). 

Awareness and Implementation of Federal Government Hiring Executive Order 

Two questions were asked of survey respondents to  find out more about their awareness 
and current  agency implementation of the Executive Order 13163,  which requires the 
Federal government to hire 100,000  qualified individuals with disabilities over the next  
five years. 

When asked about awareness of the Executive Order,  almost two in five (38 percent) 
indicated an aware-ness  of it. The degree of awareness was significantly  higher among 
white-collar supervisors (42 percent)  compared to blue-collar supervisors (24 percent). 

Those surveyed were also asked to what extent their  agency's plan to implement this 
executive order has  influenced their recruitment and hiring practices to  date. Of those 
who indicated that they were aware of  the order at all (n= 329), again approximately two 
in  five (38 percent) indicated that this had influenced  their hiring decisions a great deal 
or somewhat.  Supervisors with experience supervising employees  with disabilities were 
more aware of this order (43  percent compared to 30 percent) and also more likely  to 
say it had an impact on their hiring decisions (43  percent compared to 25 percent), than 
those with out  any employees with disabilities. 

Awareness and Implementation of Executive Order to Establish Written Accommodation 
Procedures 

Several survey items dealt with supervisor awareness  of and also the influence on 
supervisory practice of  the EEOC Guidelines for Federal agencies to implement  
Executive Order 13164, establishing written procedures  to facilitate the provision of 
reasonable accommodation.  This requires that each Federal agency establish  effective 
written procedures for processing requests  for reasonable accommodation by employees 
and  applicants with disabilities. Similar to their awareness  of the Federal government 
hiring initiative discussed  above, two out of five supervisors (41 percent), reported  
awareness of these EEOC guidelines requiring agencies  to develop a written 
accommodation procedure. Nearly  half (47 percent) of respondents aware of this 
provision  indicated that it had influenced their supervisory  practices "a great deal or 
somewhat." Again, supervisors  with experience with employees with disabilities  were 
more likely to be aware of these guidelines (46  percent compared to 34 percent) and 
reported that it  had a greater influence on their practices (55 percent  compared to 29 
percent), than those who did not  supervise employees with disabilities.  


 Summary and Implications 

Overview 

This report identifies how Federal supervisors in the  17 Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults  with Disabilities agencies are responding to the  employment 
disability nondiscrimination requirements  of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the 
Rehabilitation  Act, the Federal hiring authorities, and Presidential  Orders issued in 2000 
designed to promote employment  and effective accommodation in the Federal 
workforce.  The Task Force agencies account for over half of the  total employees in the 
Executive Branch of the government,  employing close to a million employees, including  
more than 63,000 employees with disabilities. These  research results provide an 
opportunity for analysis of  the policy and practice efforts of Federal agencies in  
recruiting and retaining persons with disabilities in  Federal employment. 

This is a significant study because it will help the  Federal government assess the 
effectiveness of the  recent Federal hiring authorities and other initiatives  such as the 
Presidential Orders in stimulating hiring  and accommodation of people with disabilities. 
In  addition, it helps us to understand how the Federal  workplace is responding to the 
over seven percent of  all current civilian Executive Branch employees with  disabilities. 
*1 

The supervisors surveyed reported significant supervisory  experience in the Federal 
government. Over 95 percent  of the supervisors surveyed had been with their agency  
five or more years, and fully half had more than ten  years of experience as a Federal 
supervisor. Thus, most  of those responding to the survey have significant  experience 
within the Federal workforce during the  implementation of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act,  the special hiring authorities for people with disabilities,  and the 
Presidential Orders to promote hiring and  accommodation of applicants and employees 
with  disabilities within the U. S. Federal workforce. Overall,  the number of employees 
immediately supervised by  this group of supervisors was nearly 15,000, with the  total 
number of employees supervised approaching  40,000. Since the purpose of the study 
was to assess  the impact of these provisions on supervisory practice,  the pool of survey 
respondents selected should provide  us with a valid perspective on these issues. 

This study confirms that supervisors in the Federal  government play a critical role in the 
accommodation  process for applicants and employees with disabilities  in the Federal 
workforce. It explores how supervisors  in the Federal government have responded to 
date to  the Federal hiring authorities and other special provisions  to facilitate 
employment of people with disabilities.  It also investigates other ways to address the  
many challenges to the recruitment, hiring, retention,  and career advancement of adults 
with disabilities in  the Federal workforce that warrant consideration. This  summary and 
implications section includes: a discussion  of supervisor experience with accommodation 
to  date, the Federal supervisor role in recruitment, ways  to maximize opportunities for 
promotion and advancement  for people with disabilities, resources most often  used to 
resolve ADA issues, continuing training needs  for supervisors on disability-related 
information, and  ways to maximize implementation of the Presidential  Orders to 
promote hiring and advancement of people  with disabilities in the Federal workforce. 

Supervisor Experience with Recruitment and Accommodation 

This study confirms the importance of the supervisory  role in the accommodation 
process. Half of the supervisors  had received at least one accommodation request  over 
the past five years, over a third had received  between one to three requests, and one in 
ten had  received between four and ten requests. It is encouraging  to note that more than 
three-quarters of supervisors  surveyed reported that their agency had a formal  process 
for handling accommodation requests. Also of  interest is that fully half of the supervisors 
surveyed  saw themselves as taking a central role in the accommodation  decision-making 
process. Most commonly,  the respondent as the supervisor, in consultation with  their 
immediate supervisor, made this decision, followed  by the respondent themselves as 
immediate supervisor  of the employee. This result demonstrates the importance  and 
influence of a supervisor in the accommodation  process. 

One of the purposes of this study is to assess supervisors'  awareness and use of the 
Federal hiring authorities  for individuals with disabilities, including special hiring  
provisions for people with severe physical disabilities,  mental retardation, psychiatric 
disabilities, disabled  veterans, and the provision for the hiring of readers and  interpreters 
and other personal assistants for employees  with disabilities. *2 Results of this survey 
show that  over half the supervisors had supervised at least one  employee with an EEOC 
targeted disability. *3 The types  of disabilities most often reported by the supervisors  
surveyed were musculoskeletal disorders (i.e. back,  repetitive motion injuries, etc.), 
hearing impairment,  visual impairment, and genetic/ physical/ neurological  conditions 
affecting limbs and/ or spine. Fewer supervisors  had experience with persons with 
cognitive  disabilities (mental retardation) and psychiatric  disabilities. 

Most supervisors appear to be responsive to accommodation  requests, with fewer than 
two percent saying  they could not provide an accommodation. The vast  majority of 
those who hadn't made an accommodation  had not needed to provide it. The types of 
accommodations reported by the largest number of supervisors  were: advocating making 
existing facilities accessible,  modifying the work environment, and acquiring or  
modifying equipment or devices. These are workplace  accommodations that might 
address the accommodation  needs of the populations most often supervised  by this 
respondent pool -- those with musculoskeletal  disabilities, hearing and/ or visual 
impairment, and  conditions affecting limbs and/ or spine. Supervisors  were less likely to 
report accommodations targeted to  individuals with hearing and vision impairments, 
such  as providing qualified readers or interpreters, and  acquiring or modifying training 
materials, but this  may be a reflection of the wide range of severity of  these disabilities. 

Both the lower frequency of use of accommodations  targeted to those with vision and 
hearing impairments  and the low use of job coaches are areas that merit  further 
investigation. Effective recruitment and retention  of individuals who are blind, deaf, or 
have mental  retardation (cognitive disabilities) requires that supervisors  have more 
information about and experience with  these kinds of accommodations. In addition, 
effective  use of the possible accommodation of reassignment to  a vacant position should 
be promoted, where feasible. 

Also of interest is the supervisors' report of where  they seek accommodation information 
assistance. The  resources used by the largest number of supervisors  were human 
resource personnel at the central and  serving/ sub agency levels. Much less often used 
were  specialty disability information persons or services like  the state vocational 
rehabilitation agency, Disabilities  Services Office, Disabled Employee Advisory Group, 
local  independent living center or other disability organization,  or the Job 
Accommodation Network (JAN). Yet,  when these services were used, they were seen as 
helpful  by approximately three-quarters or more of the respondents.  These results 
suggest that it is imperative to  keep central and sub-agency human resource personnel  
informed about disability issues, as they are the  first line of resources used by 
supervisors to address  their accommodation questions. They could also serve  as an 
effective conduit to refer supervisors towards  less frequently used resources. In addition, 
it appears  that the services of disability specialty organizations  needs to be given a much 
higher profile, to increase  awareness of their existence as possible resources  among 
Federal supervisors. 

Supervisor Role in Recruitment 

Eighty percent of the respondents reported hiring new  employees in the past five years 
(or since they became  a Federal supervisor, if less than five years), with one-third  of 
these reporting that they had hired at least  one person with a disability in this period. 
Approximately  one-third of the respondents reported being  very involved in recruitment 
within their agency, with  white-collar supervisors more likely to be involved  than blue-
collar. Obviously, having supervisors well  informed about the Federal initiatives to 
recruit people  with disabilities and the accommodation process is  vital, given their 
significant role in the hiring process. 

However, only slightly more than half of the supervisors  involved in recruitment 
reported being very familiar or  somewhat familiar with the special hiring authorities  for 
the Federal government that promote hiring disabled  veterans, while approximately one-
third were familiar  with hiring readers/ interpreters and other personal  assistants for 
employees with disabilities, and the  special hiring authorities for hiring people with 
cognitive  disabilities (mental retardation), significant  physical disabilities, or people 
who have recovered  from mental illness. This lack of awareness of these  provisions 
suggest that much more promotion among  supervisors of these Federal hiring authorities 
and  supporting initiatives needs to be done. 

Exceedingly encouraging is the fact that over half of  the respondents reported that when 
changes were made  to accommodate individuals with disabilities in the  recruitment and 
pre-employment screening processes,  these changes were easy or very easy to make. 
Also  good news is that over half of the respondents indicated  that in their opinion, their 
agency sets reasonable  affirmative employment goals and makes an effort to  achieve 
these goals. 

However, confirming the earlier comments about  supervisors' lack of experience with 
accommodations  specifically relating to persons with vision and hearing  impairments, 
more than a third reported being unfamiliar  or very unfamiliar with accommodations for 
persons  with communication disabilities, such as adapting  print materials used in the 
interview (to large print,  diskette, or Braille), using a reader to assist a person  with a 
learning disability or visual impairment, using  a teletypewriter (TTY) or relay service to 
set up  interviews, and accessing sign language interpreters.  This suggests that more 
information about how to  address these accommodations and resources available  to 
assist supervisors needs to be disseminated. 

Opportunities for Promotion and Advancement 

When asked about continuing barriers to employment  or advancement of people with 
disabilities, supervisors  most often identified the lack of related experience or  requisite 
skills and training on behalf of the individuals  with disabilities, as well as supervisor 
knowledge of  which accommodation to make, the workplace failing  to provide an 
accommodation when needed, and attitudes  and stereotypes towards people with 
disabilities.  Supervisors responding to this survey identified visible  top management 
commitment and skills/ training for  employees with disabilities as the most effective 
means  of reducing these remaining barriers to employment or  advancement of people 
with disabilities. 

The response of supervisors to the identification of  remaining barriers to people with 
disabilities confirms  the importance of special initiatives like those provided  in the 
Presidential Orders to promote written accommodation  polices in each Federal agency. 
A clear  message from Federal leadership about the importance  of recruitment and 
retention of employees with disabilities  is imperative, as confirmed by the perceptions of  
Federal supervisors. In addition, expanded opportunities  for targeted training and work 
experience for individuals  with disabilities is confirmed here. At the Federal  level, 
National Disability Mentoring Day, conducted  successfully over the past two years, as 
well as the  Workforce Recruitment Program, are examples of such  needed programs. In 
addition, the technology training  programs for people with disabilities recently 
conducted  under the leadership of the U. S. Department of Labor  provide an example of 
a significant Federal government  response to the recognition that creation and promotion  
of training opportunities is needed for people  with disabilities to be competitive in the 
current job  market. Finally, the Office of Personnel Management has  reinforced its 
commitment to promote employment  opportunities for people with disabilities through 
the  President's New Freedom Initiative and Executive Order  13217, by identifying 
multiple interagency initiatives  it will implement in FY 2002. *4 

Another question for further investigation here is  whether supervisor perceptions of skill 
and experience  deficits in people with disabilities compared to their  nondisabled peers 
are due to an actual disparity in  these job requisites, or are a function of continuing  
attitudinal stereotypes and biases about people with  disabilities. 

Resources Most Used to Resolve ADA Issues 

Another area of interest is the choice of resources  used to resolve accommodation and 
disability-related  issues. Again, human resource staff and the Equal  Employment 
Opportunity (EEO) staff were most often  used, and seen as very helpful when used. Far 
less  often used were the Disabilities Services Office,  selective placement coordinator, 
and the Job Accommodation  Network (JAN), despite the fact that these  resources were 
seen as helpful or very helpful in  resolving ADA disputes by three-quarters or more of  
those who used them. 

Again, this is an area where it is important that the  Federal government ensures that 
human resource  personnel and EEO personnel are well informed about  disability-related 
issues and resources, as they are the  first line of resources used by supervisors to resolve  
ADA issues. In addition, it appears that the services of  disability specialty organizations 
within Federal agencies  need to be better promoted among Federal supervisors. 

Continuing Need for Supervisor Training 

Nine out of ten respondents reported having had some  formal civil rights training as a 
Federal supervisor,  with approximately half of those trained receiving  between one and 
fifteen hours of training. This training  was most often provided as a part of general 
employment  discrimination or diversity training, or of general  supervisory/ management 
training. In terms of promoting  further information among supervisors on disability- 
related topics, respondents saw making ADA/  disability employment a mandatory 
element of management  training as the most effective incentive to  encourage attendance 
at disability nondiscrimination  related training. 

Consistent with their responses about experience with  the special hiring authorities, and 
accommodations for  persons with psychiatric disabilities, supervisors' top  choices for 
more information were accommodations  for persons with psychiatric/ mental illness 
disabilities  and the special Federal hiring authorities for persons  with disabilities. 
Supervisors also noted that they  would like more information about the accommodation  
process generally. This indicates that supervisors are  indeed interested in these topic 
areas and willing to  put in some effort to learn more about them. 

Also important to note is that the supervisors most  often used video materials and on-site 
consultation/  training to get disability-related information. Reported  as least-often used 
were government-sponsored  programs and employee-sponsored disability organizations.  
The lack of use of these particular resources  may have been a function of lack of 
awareness of  them, as one in three respondents or more indicated  that they were not 
aware of either of these resources.  Here again, better internal promotion among Federal  
supervisors of these specialty disability resources is  indicated. 

Supervisor Awareness of and Impact to Date of Presidential Orders 

A significant part of the effort of this study was aimed  at informing Federal leadership 
about the impact to  date of Presidential Orders to promote the hiring and  retention of 
applicants and employees with disabilities. 

Survey respondents were asked about their awareness  of the Federal initiative regarding 
telecommuting/  telework for individuals with significant disabilities.  Approximately one 
in three were aware of this provision,  with white-collar supervisors significantly more 
likely  to be aware of this initiative compared to blue-collar  supervisors. Overall, 13 
percent of the respondents  indicated they currently supervise full-time employees  who 
work primarily from home or another off-site  location. White-collar supervisors, 
however, were far  more likely to have this situation than their blue-collar  supervisors. 

When asked whether, in their opinion, office-based full  time positions that they currently 
supervised could be  relocated to home-based or other site facilities, approximately  one-
third of the white-collar supervisors reported  that this was possible (compared to six 
percent of blue-collar  supervisors). When asked about the ability to  develop full-time 
positions that could be performed  from home or another off-site location, respondents  
indicated it would be easier to split such positions  between home and off-site, rather than 
to develop  positions that would be dedicated to full-time off-site  employment. Nearly 
half of the white-collar supervisors  responded that it would be very easy/ easy to 
accommodate  an individual with a chronic illness or disability  with a similar home/ 
office split. However, over  three quarters of the blue-collar supervisors reported it  
would be either difficult or impossible. Given the types  of positions the blue-collar 
supervisors oversee, this  result is not too surprising, as they would be far less  likely to 
have work that could be accomplished  remotely. 

Supervisor responses to these questions provide  encouraging feedback about the possible 
use of flex  place positions, at least on a part-time basis, to  accommodate the need for at-
home work for employees with disabilities. Also very helpful were the  supervisor 
respondents' ratings of approaches that  would assist in this initiative. Respondents 
indicated  that off-site technology support, guidance for performance  assessment of off-
site workers, and formal  flexplace agreements between off-site employees and  
supervisors would all be helpful to them as a Supervisor  in creating or supporting home-
based or off-site/  flexplace/ telecommuting employee positions. 

Approximately three of four supervisors reported that  the following would be helpful in 
implementing the  Technology Nondiscrimination requirements of Section  508: The 
technical staff within their agency (i.e. chief  information officer/ helpdesk), centralized 
technical  assistance on technology accessibility issues, and  training procurement 
specialists in Section 508  requirements. 

Only two in five supervisors surveyed were aware of  any one of the following executive 
orders regarding:  the hiring of 100,000 qualified individuals with  disabilities over the 
next five years (Executive Order  13163), the EEOC guidelines for Federal agencies to  
establish written procedures to facilitate the provision  of reasonable accommodation 
(Executive Order 13164),  and the July, 2000 Federal Initiative (Presidential  
Memorandum) regarding telecommuting/ telework for  individuals with significant 
disabilities. Over a third  were not aware of any of the three and less than one  in five (16 
percent) reported awareness of all of them.  This low level of awareness is especially 
disturbing in  light of the fact that a third of the supervisors had  reported being very 
involved in the recruitment  process. Even when this "very involved" group is  examined 
separately, only one in five are aware of all  three orders/ initiatives, with nearly a third 
reporting  not being aware of any of them. Although supervisors  who have experience 
with employees with disabilities  were found to be more likely to be aware of these  
orders and initiatives than supervisors without this  experience, still only one in five are 
aware of all three  orders/ initiatives and three in ten are not aware of  any of them. This 
points to a troubling disconnect  regarding these important initiatives -- how can they  be 
effective when so many of the supervisors on the  "front line" are aware of them? 

On the positive side, approximately two of five of  those who were aware of the orders 
for the hiring of  100,000 individuals with disabilities and the written  procedures for the 
provision of reasonable accommodations,  reported them to have had influenced their  
practices either somewhat or a great deal. As would be  expected, those who had 
supervised employees with  disabilities reported a greater impact on their practice  than 
supervisors without experience with employees  with disabilities. 

Further Research and Next Steps 

The results discussed in this report indicate a need for  further research. One direction for 
this research is to  seek perspectives on nondiscriminatory practices from  Federal 
employees with disabilities and their co-workers.  Additional areas for research include 
Federal training  programs, technology applications, and issues around  attitudinal 
barriers versus the perceived knowledge and  skills of people with disabilities as 
employment  barriers. 

This report indicates many areas where the Federal  government can and should provide 
additional promotion,  outreach, and technical assistance to its agencies.  This includes 
the education on the use of special hiring  authorities; accommodations for people with 
visual,  learning, and hearing disabilities, and people with  psychiatric disabilities; 
disability resources that facilitate  the accommodations process; government-wide 
initiatives  to promote the recruitment, hiring, retention,  and career advancement of 
people with disabilities;  and improving technology, telecommuting and  telework. 

Finally, this report highlights policy areas that warrant  consideration by the Federal 
government. These areas  include the possibility of mandatory training in  
nondiscriminatory practices for supervisors; government- wide consistency in policies 
and procedures for  expanding telecommuting and telework for people  with disabilities; 
more firmly establishing agency-wide  goals in the area of employment of people with  
disabilities through the Government Performance and  Results Act; and re-visiting the 
Federal government's  commitment to hiring and reasonable accommodation  initiatives 
begun in 2000. 

The information contained in this report will be broadly  disseminated to Task Force 
member agencies as well  as Federal departments and agencies for consideration  in their 
efforts to increase opportunities and remove  barriers to the employment of people with 
disabilities  in the Federal government. 

©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 

Footnotes;
*1 Under section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act, Federal employers  may not discriminate 
against people with disabilities in hiring,  placement or advancement practices. Federal 
agencies are required  to establish affirmative action plans to make it clear that the  
Federal Government is an equal opportunity employer. This applies  to each department, 
agency and instrumentality of the executive  branch of the Federal Government. For 
further information see  http:// www. jan. wvu. edu/ media/ REHABACT. html. 

*2 A copy of this Report can be obtained from the USDOL website at  http:// www. dol. 
gov/-sec/ programs/ ptfead/ related. html. 

*3 Further information about this research can be found in Bruyère,  S. (2000). Disability 
Employment Policies and Practices in Private  and Federal Sector Organizations. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University,  School of Industrial and Labor Relations Extension Division,  
Program on Employment and Disability, available on the Cornell  University web site at 
http:// www. ilr. cornell. edu/ extension/ files/  download/ comparison16REVISED. pdf . 

*4 Federal Civilian Workforce Statistics: Demographic Profile  of the Federal Workforce, 
as of September 30, 2000, http://  www. opm. gov/ feddata/ demograp/ 00demogr. pdf 

*5 Targeted disabilities, as defined by the Equal Employment  Opportunity commission 
(EEOC), are disabilities "targeted" for  emphasis in affirmative action planning. These 
are: deaness,  blindness, missing extremities, partial paralysis, copmlete  paralysis, 
convulsive disorders, mental retardation, mental illness,  and genetic or physical 
condition affecting limbs and/ or spine.  EEOC recognizes that some disabilities that are 
not targeted are  nevertheless just as severe or more severe than some disabilities  that are 
targeted. 

*6 http:// www. opm. gov/ feddata/ demograp. htm 

*7 Akabas, S., Gates, L. & Galvin, D. (1992). Disability management:  A complete 
system to reduce costs, increase productivity, meet  employee needs, and ensure legal 
compliance. New York: AMACOM,  p. 2. 

*8 For further information, see www. section508. gov. 
Summary and implications Footnotes:

*1 Source: Demographic Profile of the Federal Workforce. September  20, 2000 
(unpublished). Washington, D. C.: U. S. Office of Personnel  Management. 

*2 Further information about these U. S. Federal hiring authorities  for people with 
disabilities can be found at the U. S. Office of  Personnel Management web site at http:// 
www. opm. gov/  disability/ employment. htm. 

*3 Targeted disabilities, as defined by the Equal Employment  Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC), are disabilities "targeted" for  emphasis in affirmative action planning. These 
are: deafness,  blindness, missing extremities, mental retardation, mental illness,  and 
genetic or physical conditions affecting limbs and/ or spine.  For further information, see 
the U. S. Office of Personnel Management  web site at http:// www. opm. gov/ disability/  
employment. htm. 

*4 Delivering on the Promise: Compilation of Individual Federal Agency Reports to 
Eliminate Barriers and Promote Community Integration. (2002). Washington, D. C.: U. 
S. Department of Health  and Human Services. 

Appendices 

Appendix A: Survey Text

Survey of the Federal Government 
on Supervisor Practices in 
Employment of People with Disabilities 

Sponsored by: 
The Presidential Task Force 
on Employment of Adults 
with Disabilities 

Conducted by: 
Cornell University 
School of Industrial & 
Labor Relations 

The research which sponsored the original survey design was funded by the U. S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research for 
a Research and Demonstration Project to the Program on Employment and Disability in 
the School of Industrial and Labor Relations Extension Division at Cornell University 
(grant #H133A70005), Susanne M. Bruyère, Principal Investigator 

©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 

Please answer each question as it pertains to your Agency/personal experience as a 
supervisor in the federal government. When questions refer to your agency, please 
answer for the unit of your agency for which you are responsible 

All responses to this survey are completely anonymous and confidential. Participation in 
this research is entirely voluntary, you may decline to answer or refuse to participate and 
may withdraw at any time without penalty. 

Definitions 

The employment provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the 
Rehabilitation Act require reasonable accommodation. A reasonable accommodation is a 
modification or adjustment to a job, the work environment, or the way things are usually 
done that enables a qualified individual with a disability to enjoy an equal opportunity. 
Reasonable accommodations must be provided unless the employer can show that the 
accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the business. (The law requires that 
only qualified people with disabilities are eligible for reasonable accommodation.) 
A "person with a disability" is someone who: a) has a physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits a major life activity, b) has a record of such an impairment or, c) is 
regarded as having such an impairment. 

A qualified individual with a disability is a person with a disability who: 

* Satisfies the requisite skill, education and other job- related requirements of the position 

*  Can perform the essential functions of the position with or without reasonable 
accommodation. 

I. Demographic Information 

S1. Number of Federal employees for whom you are the immediate supervisor: (Please 
note number) 

S2. Total number of employees you supervise: total employees supervised (Please note 
number) (If = 0 then ineligible) 

S3. Number of years as a supervisor in the Federal government: years (If <1 year then 
ineligible) 

5. Number of years with your department or Agency: years 

II. Issue Areas 
A. The Reasonable Accommodation Process 

PTF2. Does your agency have a formal process for handling accommodation requests? 
1 Yes 2 No 8 Don't know 

1. To meet the needs of your employees with disabilities, have you or your agency on 
the behalf of an employee you supervise: 
(Please circle one response for each item.  Possible responses are yes; no, not able to; no, 
never needed to; don't know)

a. advocated to make existing facilities  accessible to employees with disabilities 
(restrooms, door entrances, hallways, etc.) 
b. restructured jobs or modified work hours  
c. made reassignment to vacant positions  
d. acquired or modified equipment or devices  
e. acquired or modified examination or training materials  
f. provided qualified readers or interpreters  (includes personal assistants) 
h. changed supervisory methods  
i. made parking or transportation accommodations  
j. provided written job instructions  
l. provided a job coach  
m. Other (Please specify )  


S1. Over the past five fiscal years, or since you have been a Federal supervisor 
(whichever is less), how many accommodation requests have you received as a 
supervisor? 
Number of Requests 

S2. How many employees with disabilities have you had supervisory responsibilities for 
in the past five years? 
(if none skip to 2) 

S3. What types of disabilities have your employees had? (please check all that apply) 
a. Visual impairment 
b. Hearing impairment 
c. Missing extremities 
d. Partial paralysis 
e. Total paralysis 
f. Convulsive disorders 
g. Mental retardation 
h. Mental illness 
i. Genetic/ physical/ neurological condition affecting limbs and/ or spine 
j. Musculo-skeletal disorders (i. e. 
back, repetitive motion injury, etc.) 
k. Other (please specify) 

2. If an accommodation request is made, who would make the final decision regarding 
the provision of a accommodation? (Please circle one response) 

1. You as the immediate supervisor of the 
employee requesting 
12. You in consultation with your immediate 
supervisor 
2. Occupational health/ medical clinic staff 
3. Safety/ ergonomic staff 
4. HR staff 
5. Legal counsel (internal or external) 
6. Your agency's EEO office 
7. Other manager/ director 
8. Disability management/ benefits staff 
13. Disabilities services office 
9. Other (please specify) 
10. No single final responsible party) 
11. Don't know 

S4. Have you used the following resources for accommodation 
assistance? 
If YES: how helpful was it? (Very helpful, moderately helpful, somewhat helpful, 
slightly helpful, not helpful at all)
If NO: why not? (Not aware of this resource, Aware, but not needed, aware, but not 
helpful)

a. Central human resource personnel 
(Department wide) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
b. Servicing human resource personnel 
(sub-agency or unit level) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
c. Disabilities Services Office 
(i. e. CAP, COAST, TARGET Center) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
d. EEO office 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
e. Disability management/ benefits 
staff 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
f. Occupational health/ medical 
clinic staff 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
g. Safety/ ergonomic staff 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
h. Employee Assistance Program 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
i. External health care provider 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
j. State vocational rehabilitation 
agencies 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
k. Local independent living centers 
or other disability organizations 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
l. Job Accommodation Network 
(toll-free number) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
n. Disabled Employee Advisory Group 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
o. Selective Placement Coordinator 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
m. Other 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 

B. Recruitment, Pre-Employment Screening, Testing, and Orientation 

S1. How many employees have you hired in the past five years or since you were a 
Federal supervisor (whichever is less)? 

S2. How many of these new hires have had a disability? 
S3. How involved are you in recruitment? 1 Very involved 2 Fairly involved 3 Slightly 
involved 4 Not at all involved 8 Don't know 

S4. How familiar are you with the special appointing authorities, to bring people with 
disabilities into the Federal workplace and how frequently have you used them? (Please 
circle one response per item) 
Familiarity: Very familiar, Somewhat familiar, slightly familiar, not aware of provisions.
Frequency of use:  Frequently, occasionally, never.

a. For hiring people with cognitive  disabilities (mental retardation), 
significant physical disabilities, or people who have recovered 
from mental illness 

b. For hiring readers/ interpreters  and other personal assistants 
for employees with disabilities 

c. For hiring disabled veterans  (30 percent disabled or more) 

1. In order to comply with the ADA and/ or the Rehabilitation Act, how easy or difficult 
was it for you to make the following changes or adaptations? 
(Very easy, easy, neither easy nor difficult, difficult, very difficult, not able to make this 
change, change not requested, don't know).

c. Changing questions asked in interviews 
d. Making interview locations accessible to people with disabilities 
h. Making information accessible for a deaf or hard of hearing person 
(e. g. sign language interpreter; text telephone; captioning on video) 
i. Making information accessible for persons with visual or learning 
disabilities (e. g. a reader, Braille, large print, diskette, or audio-cassette 
or telephone version of application) 
l. Other (Please specify) 

PTF4. To what extent does your agency set reasonable affirmative employment goals and 
make an effort to achieve them? 
1 A great deal 2 Somewhat 3 Minimally 4 Not at all 8 Don't know 

3. Generally, how familiar are you with the following for applicant interviewing? (Please 
circle one response per item) 
(very familiar, familiar, neither familiar nor unfamiliar, unfamiliar, very unfamiliar, don't 
know).
a. Framing questions to applicants 1 2 3 4 5 8 about the ability to perform specific 
job tasks rather than about disability 
b. Restrictions on obtaining medical 1 2 3 4 5 8 examinations and medical history 
information 
c. Restrictions on eliciting information 1 2 3 4 5 8 about medical issues affecting 
applicants' 
health and safety on the job 
d. Knowing when to ask an applicant about 1 2 3 4 5 8 how s/ he would perform specific 
job tasks 
e. Accessing sign language interpreters 1 2 3 4 5 8 
f. Using a teletypewriter (TTY) or relay service 1 2 3 4 5 8 to set up interviews 
g. Using a reader to assist a person with 1 2 3 4 5 8 a learning disability or vision 
impairment 
h. Adapting print materials used in the 1 2 3 4 5 8 interview to large print, diskette, or 
Braille 
i. Knowing when to test for illegal drugs 1 2 3 4 5 8 

D. Opportunities for Promotion/ Training 

1. In your opinion, do any of the following pose a barrier to employment or advancement 
for persons with disabilities in your agency? (Please circle all that apply) 

a Cost of accommodations 
b Cost of training 
c Additional cost of supervision 
i Additional cost of travel and transportation( such as a blind person having 
to have a driver to get to a worksite (if they can't drive themselves) 
d Attitudes/ stereotypes 
e A supervisor's knowledge of which accommodation to make 
f Lack of requisite skills and training on behalf of the person with a disability 
g Lack of related experience on behalf of the person with a disability 
j Lack of established policy/ procedures 
k Accommodation not provided when needed 
h Other (Please specify ) 

2. How effective or ineffective would each of the following be in reducing barriers to 
employment or advancement for persons with disabilities within your agency? (Please 
circle one response for each item) 
(rating of 1 to 5, with 1 being very effective, 5 being very ineffective.  8 is don't know)

a. Special budget allocation/ centralized accommodation fund 1 2 3 4 5 8 
b. Short-term outside assistance with job supervision 1 2 3 4 5 8 (e. g. outside job coach) 
c. Staff training 1 2 3 4 5 8 
d. On-site consultation or technical assistance 1 2 3 4 5 8 
e. Mentoring 1 2 3 4 5 8 
f. Visible top management commitment 1 2 3 4 5 8 
Sg. Include affirmative action and accommodation items for 1 2 3 4 5 8 persons with 
disabilities in supervisor performance appraisals 
Sh. Changing co-worker/ supervisor attitudes towards persons 1 2 3 4 5 8 with disabilities 
Si. Departmental reward/ recognition ex. A certificate acknowledging outstanding 
performance 1 2 3 4 5 8 
Sj. Development and input from a disability advisory group 1 2 3 4 5 8 
Sk. Skills training for employees with disabilities 1 2 3 4 5 8 
g. Other (Please specify ) 1 2 3 4 5 8 

4. Have you used the following to ensure that people with disabilities you supervise have 
access to meetings, promotional, social opportunities and/ or training? (Please circle one 
response for each item) 
(yes, no, not able to provide, no, never needed to provide, don't know)

a. Wheelchair access  
b. Communication access for deaf or hard of hearing person  (e. g. sign language 
interpreter; text telephone; captioning 
on video; etc.) 
c. Communication access for persons with visual or learning  disabilities (e. g., Braille, 
large print, diskette or audiocassette 
version of application; reader) 
f. Other (Please specify )  

E. Disciplinary Process, Grievance, Discharge, or Termination 

1. Does your agency have a grievance or dispute resolution process to deal with disability 
and accommodation issues? (Please circle one response) 
1 Yes 2 No 8 Don't know 

2. Have you as a Federal supervisor ever experienced any of the following as a formal 
disability complaint? (Please circle one response for each item) 
Yes No Don't know 

a. Wrongful discharge 1 2 8 
b. Failure to provide reasonable accommodation 1 2 8 
c. Failure to hire 1 2 8 
d. Harassment 1 2 8 
e. Unfair discipline 1 2 8 
f. Failure to promote 1 2 8 
g. Suspension 1 2 8 
l. Other (specify) 1 2 8 

S3. If an accommodation dispute arises, how easy or difficult would the following be for 
you? 
(rated 1 to 5, with 1 being very easy and 5 being very difficult.  8 is don't know)

a. Discussing accommodation needs with the individual 1 2 3 4 5 8 
b. Getting sufficient training on dispute resolution approaches 1 2 3 4 5 8 
c. Accessing a resource person to help with accommodation issues 1 2 3 4 5 8 (HR, EEO, 
health & safety, ergonomics, Employee Relations, etc.) 
d. Having access to a person trained in alternative dispute 1 2 3 4 5 8 resolution (ADR) 
e. Determining the most appropriate dispute resolution process 1 2 3 4 5 8 (Dispute 
resolution is conflict resolution, or for example using 
a mediator to solve a disagreement 
f. Effectively using the existing dispute/ complaint resolution 1 2 3 4 5 8 process Dispute 
resolution is conflict resolution or for example 
using a mediator to solve a disagreement 

H. General 

S1. Have you been trained in the following ADA/ Rehabilitation Act topics? Would you 
like more information in this area?
Training? Yes, no, don't know
More information? Yes, no.

PTF2. The special appointing/ hiring authorities 1 2 8 1 2 
a. Non-discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices 1 2 8 1 2 
b. The accommodation process 1 2 8 1 2 
c. Equal access in promotional opportunities and training 1 2 8 1 2 
d. Accommodation for mental disabilities 1 2 8 1 2 
e. Defining essential job functions 1 2 8 1 2 
f. Confidentiality requirements of medical information 1 2 8 1 2 
h. Non-discrimination in the disciplinary process or termination 1 2 8 1 2 
i. Conflict resolution in the accommodation process 1 2 8 1 2 
j. Disability awareness and/ or sensitivity training 1 2 8 1 2 
Sk. Section 508 training (Section 508 requires that electronic 1 2 8 1 2 
and information technology developed, procured, maintained, 
or used by the Federal government be accessible to people 
with disabilities) 
m. Other (Please specify) 1 2 8 1 2 

IF all of the above questions are "no" or "don't know" SKIP TO S4 

S2. Approximately how many hours of formal ADA/ Rehabilitation Act training (class, 
seminar, conference) have you received as a Federal supervisor? 

None 
1-5hrs 
6-10hrs 
11-15hrs 
16-20hrs 
21-25hrs 
More than 25hrs 

S3. How was the ADA/ Rehabilitation Act training provided to you as a Federal 
supervisor? (circle all that apply) 

a. Specialized focus on disability by Federal Government staff expert 
b. Specialized focus on disability by external consultant 
c. As a part of general employment discrimination or diversity training 
d. As a part of general supervisory/ management training 
e. Other 

S4. How effective or ineffective would each of the following incentives be in 
encouraging disability non-discriminatory related training? (including ADA, disability 
employment, Rehab Act, EEOC guidance, 508 
Compliance) (Please circle one response for each item) 
(rating of 1 to 5, with 1 being very effective, 5 being very ineffective.  8 is don't know)

a. Department reward/ recognition for receiving ADA training 1 2 3 4 5 8 
b. ADA training available on the internet 1 2 3 4 5 8 
c. Pay ADA training costs 1 2 3 4 5 8 
d. Make ADA/ Disability employment a mandatory element of management training 1 2 
3 4 5 8 
e. Other (Please specify ) 1 2 3 4 5 8 

2. Please indicate which of the following resources you have utilized to help resolve 
ADA issues and rate their degree of helpfulness. 
n If YES: how helpful was it? 
n If NO: why not? 
UTILIZED: Yes or no
If no: Not aware of this resource, aware but not needed, aware but not helpful
If yes: rated 1 to 5 with 1 being very helpful and 5 not helpful at all
Yes No If no: Why not? 

Sa. State vocational rehabilitation agencies, Disability 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 & Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, Local 
independent living centers or other disability organizations, or (toll-free number) 
c. Job Accommodation Network (toll-free number) 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
e. U. S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 (EEOC) 
f. Your agency's EEO office 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
g. Agency legal counsel 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
h. Your safety/ ergonomics staff 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
i. Disability management/ benefits staff 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
j. Union representative 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
k. Other Federal agencies or professional society or 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 business agency 
(e. g., OPM, MSPB, SHRM, IPMA) 
l. Dispute resolution center/ mediator 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
Sm. Disabilities Services Office 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
Sn. Selective Placement Coordinator 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
So. HR Staff/ Employee Relations 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 


3. Please indicate which of the following informational mediums you use to 
address your ADA/ disability employment 
issues and rate their degree of 
helpfulness. 

n If YES: how helpful was it? 
n If NO: why not? 
UTILIZED: Yes or no
If no: Not aware of this resource, aware but not needed, aware but not helpful
If yes: rated 1 to 5 with 1 being very helpful and 5 not helpful at all
Yes No If no: Why not? 

a. Print or video materials 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
b. Telephone consultation/ information hotline 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
c. On-site consultation/ training 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
d. Web sites/ list serve/ U. S. EEOC homepage 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
e. Organizational newsletter 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
Sf. Government sponsored conferences such as 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 IDEAS (Interagency 
Disability Educational 
Awareness Showcase), Perspectives on Employment of Persons with Disabilities, FOSE 
(Federal Sectors Information Technology Fair) 
Sg. Employee sponsored disability organization in 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 your department/ 
agency 
f. Other (Please specify ) 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 

4. Does your agency have a return to work or disability management program for 
employees who are injured or become disabled? (Please circle one response) 
1 Yes, formal program with written policies/ procedures 
2 Yes, informal program with no formal written procedures 
3 No return to work/ disability management program Skip to S6 
4 Not familiar/ don't know if such a program exists 

5. To what extent has your agency's disability management program contributed to the 
following? 
(a great deal, somewhat, minimally, not at all, don't know)

a. Your awareness of the accommodation process 1 2 3 4 8 
b. An organizational structure for providing accommodations 1 2 3 4 8 (i. e. centralized 
agency resource) 
c. Recognition of the importance of confidentiality of medical information 1 2 3 4 8 
d. Raising the acceptance of employees with disabilities by other employees 1 2 3 4 8 
S6. To what extent does your agency implement affirmative action and 1 2 3 4 8 
accommodation items for persons with disabilities as a measure of agency 
effectiveness? 

Section I: Presidential Orders 

S1.How helpful will each of the following be in implementing the technology 
nondiscrimination requirements of Section 508? (508 requires that electronic and 
information technology developed, procured, maintained, or used by 
the Federal government be accessible to people with disabilities.) 
(Rated 1 to 5, with 1 being very helpful and 5 not helpful at all.  8 is don't know)

a. Centralized technology procurement which screens for these 1 2 3 4 5 8 
criteria 
b. Training procurement specialists in section 508 requirements 1 2 3 4 5 8 
c. Centralized technical assistance on technology accessibility 1 2 3 4 5 8 issues 
d. Unit specific expertise/ technical assistance on technology 1 2 3 4 5 8 accessibility 
issues 
e. The technical staff within your agency 1 2 3 4 5 8 (i. e. Chief Information Officer 
(CIO)/ Help Desk) 
f. Other (specify ) 1 2 3 4 5 8 

S2. Do you currently supervise any full-time employees who work primarily from home 
or another off-site location? 
1 Yes 2 No 

S3. In your opinion, could any of the office based full time positions you currently 
supervise be: 
a. Relocated to home-based or other off-site facilities: 
1 Yes 2 No 6 No relevant positions 

b. Split between home/ off-site location and office in a given week 
(i. e. 3 days/ week at home/ off-site, 2 days/ week in office): 
1 Yes 2 No 6 No relevant positions 

S4. How easy or difficult would it be for you to develop full time positions that could be: 
a. Performed from home or another off-site location 5 days/ week: 
1 Very Easy 2 Easy 3 Neither easy nor difficult 4 Difficult 5 Very difficult 
6 No relevant positions 8 Don't know 

b. Split between home/ off-site location and office in a given week 
(i. e. 3 days/ week at home/ off-site, 2 days/ week in office): 
1 Very Easy 2 Easy 3 Neither easy nor difficult 4 Difficult 5 Very difficult 
6 No relevant positions 8 Don't know 

If answer is "No relevant positions" for all questions S3a& b and S4a& b above, skip to 
S6. 

S5. How helpful would each of the following be to you as a supervisor in creating and 
supporting home-based or off-site/ flexiplace/ telecommuting? 
(Rated 1 to 5, with 1 being very helpful and 5 not helpful at all.  8 is don't know)

a. Guidelines for supervision of off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
b. Training for supervisors of off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
c. Training for coworkers of off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
d. Initial and ongoing training for off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
e. Off-site technology support 1 2 3 4 58 
f. Guidelines for performance assessment of off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
g. Guidelines for the design of off-site work 1 2 3 4 58 
h. Formal flexiplace agreement between off-site 1 2 3 4 58 employee and supervisor 

S6. How easy or difficult would it be for you to accommodate an individual with a 
chronic illness or disability (for example: someone who has cancer treatment, physical 
therapy, dialysis, or mobility impaired 
employees) with the ability to work at home for 1-2 days a week or intermittently? 
1 Very Easy 2 Easy 3 Neither easy nor difficult 4 Difficult 5 Very difficult 
6 No relevant positions 8 Don't know 

S7. Are you aware of the July, 2000 Federal initiative (Executive Order 13163) that 
requires the Federal Government hiring of 100,000 qualified individuals with disabilities 
over the next 5 years? 
1 Yes 2 No (skip to S9) 

S8. To what extent has your agency's plan to implement this Executive Order influenced 
your recruitment and hiring practices? 
1 A great deal 2 Somewhat 3 Minimally 4 Not at all 8 Don't know 

S9. Are you aware of the EEOC Guidelines (2/ 13/ 01) for Federal agencies to implement 
Executive Order 13164, establishing written procedures to facilitate the provision of 
reasonable accommodation? 
1 Yes 2 No (skip to S11) 

S10. To what extent do these new accommodation procedures influence your supervisory 
practice? 
1 A great deal 2 Somewhat 3 Minimally 4 Not at all 8 Don't know 

S11. Are you aware of the July, 2000 Federal initiative (presidential memorandum) 
regarding telecommuting/ telework for individuals with significant disabilities? 
1 Yes 2 No 

6. Would you like a copy of the executive summary of the results of this study? 
1 Yes 2 No 


Please provide your information 
Name: 
Agency: 
Street address: 
City: 
State: Zip: 
Telephone: 
E-mail address 


Thank you for your assistance! 
If you have any questions, please contact 


Lisa Horn 
Telephone (toll-free): (888) 367-8404 
TDD: 607-255-2891 
Email: LLH5@ cornell. edu 


©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 

Appendix B
List of All Agencies Who Participated 

(Read as Agency name, Frequency, percent, cumulative frequency, cumulative percent)

Administrative Office of the U. S. Courts 1 0.2 1 0.2 
Agency for International Development 1 0.2 2 0.5 
Agriculture 22 5.5 24 6.0 
Air Force 10 2.5 34 8.4 
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 1 0.2 35 8.7 
Army 14 3.5 49 12.2 
Central Intelligence Agency 1 0.2 50 12.4 
Commerce 6 1.5 56 13.9 
Commission on Civil Rights 1 0.2 57 14.1 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission 2 0.5 59 14.6 
Congressional Budget Office 1 0.2 60 14.9 
Consumer Product Safety Commission 2 0.5 62 15.4 
Corporation for National Service 2 0.5 64 15.9 
Defense 8 2.0 72 17.9 
Defense Contract Audit Agency 2 0.5 74 18.4 
Defense Information Systems Agency 2 0.5 76 18.9 
Defense Intelligence Agency 1 0.2 77 19.1 
Defense Logistics Agency 12 3.0 89 22.1 
Defense Nuclear Facilities Board 2 0.5 91 22.6 
Defense Security Service 1 0.2 92 22.8 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency 2 0.5 94 23.3 
Education 9 2.2 103 25.6 
Energy 14 3.5 117 29.0 
Environmental Protection Agency 19 4.7 136 33.7 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 2 0.5 138 34.2 
Executive Office of the President 2 0.5 140 34.7 
Export-Import Bank of the United States 1 0.2 141 35.0 
Farm Credit Administration 2 0.5 143 35.5 
Federal Communications Commission 2 0.5 145 36.0 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 7 1.7 152 37.7 
Federal Election Commission 1 0.2 153 38.0 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 9 2.2 162 40.2 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 1 0.2 163 40.4 
Federal Housing Finance Board 1 0.2 164 40.7 
Federal Labor Relations Authority 1 0.2 165 40.9 
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service 2 0.5 167 41.4 
Federal Reserve System 2 0.5 169 41.9 
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board 1 0.2 170 42.2 
Federal Trade Commission 2 0.5 172 42.7 
Federal Maritime Commission 2 0.5 174 43.2 
General Services Administration 3 0.7 177 43.9 
Health & Human Services 16 4.0 193 47.9 
Housing & Urban Development 2 0.5 195 48.4 
Interior 6 1.5 201 49.9 
International Trade Commission 1 0.2 202 50.1 
Justice 20 5.0 222 55.1 
Labor 11 2.7 233 57.8 
Library of Congress 1 0.2 234 58.1 
Merit Systems Protection Board 2 0.5 236 58.6 
National Aeronautics & Space Administration 17 4.2 253 62.8 
National Archives & Records Administration 2 0.5 255 63.3 
National Endowment for the Arts 1 0.2 256 63.5 
National Endowment for the Humanities 2 0.5 258 64.0 
National Gallery of Art 2 0.5 260 64.5 
National Guard Bureau 1 0.2 261 64.8 
National Imagery & Mapping Agency 1 0.2 262 65.0 
National Labor Relations Board 2 0.5 264 65.5 
National Mediation Board 1 0.2 265 65.8 
National Science Foundation 2 0.5 267 66.3 
National Transportation Safety Board 1 0.2 268 66.5 
Navy 49 12.2 317 78.7 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission 3 0.7 320 79.4 
Occupational Safety & Health Review 2 0.5 322 79.9 Commission 
Office of Government Ethics 2 0.5 324 80.4 
Office of Personnel Management 1 0.2 325 80.6 
Office of Special Counsel 1 0.2 326 80.9 
Overseas Private Investment Corporation 1 0.2 327 81.1 
Peace Corps 2 0.5 329 81.6 
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation 2 0.5 331 82.1 
Postal Rate Commission 2 0.5 333 82.6 
Railroad Retirement Board 3 0.7 336 83.4 
Securities and Exchange Commission 6 1.5 342 84.9 
Selective Service System 1 0.2 343 85.1 
Small Business Administration 2 0.5 345 85.6 
Smithsonian Institution 1 0.2 346 85.9 
Social Security Administration 16 4.0 362 89.8 
Soldiers and Airmen's Home 1 0.2 363 90.1 
State 2 0.5 365 90.6 
Tax Court of the United States 1 0.2 366 90.8 
Tennessee Valley Authority 1 0.2 367 91.1 
The Architect of the Capitol 2 0.5 369 91.6 
Transportation 15 3.7 384 95.3 
Treasury 2 0.5 386 95.8 
U. S. General Accounting Office 8 2.0 394 97.8 
U. S. Information Agency 2 0.5 396 98.3 
Veterans Affairs 6 1.5 402 99.8 
Voice of America 1 0.2 403 100.0 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U. S. Federal Government 
Agencies. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities/ Cornell 
University, 1999. 

©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 
57
58 
Appendix C: Respondent Demographics 

Organization Size at Location 

0-14 2% 
15-25 1 
26-50 2 
51-249 16 
250-499 6 
500-1499 22 
1500-2499 13 
2500-3499 6 
3500-4999 7 
5000+ 23 
Don't Know ** 
Refused 1 
** Less than one percent 
Note: percent of all respondents, n= 403 

Title of Respondent 

Director/ Chief 41% 
Deputy Assistant 2 Secretary 
Deputy Director 4 
Personnel Manager 18 
Officer 9 
Specialist 10 
Program Co-ordinator 3 
Other 13 
Don't Know 0 
Refused 0 
Note: percent of all respondents, n= 403 

Level of Organization Where Reporting From 
Entire agency (including regions) 49% 
Headquarters only 9 
Regional only 40 
Refused 2 

Function of Respondent 
Administrative 9% 
Equal Opportunity 35 
Benefits 0 
Compensation 0 
Disability 3 
Diversity 1 
Employee Relations 1 
Employment/ Recruitment 2 
Health/ Safety/ Security 0 
Human Resources (HR) 41 
Labor/ Industrial Relations ** 
Legal ** 
Organizational Development 0 
Training & Development 0 
Other 8 
Don't Know 0 
Refused 0 
** Less than one percent 
Note: percent of all respondents, n= 403 

Number of Years with Organization 
<2 6 
2-5 16 
6-10 20 
11-20 30 
20+ 29 

©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 

Appendix D: Additional Resources 

1) Department of Labor: Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) 
1331 F Street, N. W. Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20004 
Phone: (V) 202-376-6200 
(TTY) 202-376-6205 
(FAX) 202-376-6219 
Website: www. dol. gov/ odep/ 
ODEP sponsors: 
The New Freedom Initiative: Disability Direct 
Website: www. disabilitydirect. gov/ 

2) President's Committee Job Accommodation Network (JAN) 
918 Chestnut Ridge Road, Suite 1 
West Virginia University- PO Box 6080 
Morgantown, WV 26506-6080 
Phone: (V) 800-526-7234 
(TTY) 800-232-9675 
Website: www. pcepd. gov and click on 
JAN or go directly to JAN at 
janweb. icdi. wvu. edu/ english/ homeus. htm 

3) Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
1801 L Street NW (Federal Sector Programs) 
Washington, DC 20507 
Phone: (V) 800-669-3362 
(TTY) 800-800-3302 
Website: www. eeoc. gov 
For specific Federal employment questions, call the "ATTORNEY OF THE DAY" at 
202-663-4599. 

4) Department of Labor: Office of Federal Contractor Compliance Programs (OFCCP) 
Department of Labor 
Frances Perkins Building 
200 Constitution Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20210 
Phone: (V) 888-376-3227 
(V) 202-219-9475 
(TTY) 202-208-0452 
Website: www. dol. gov/ esa/ 

5) U. S. Office of Personnel Management (for Federal employment information) 
1900 E Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20415 
Phone: (V) 202-606-2700 
(TTY) 912-744-2299 
Website: www. opm. gov 


©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 

