Pre-Employment Testing and the ADA


The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requires rea-
sonable accommodation in the hiring process, and the lan-
guage of the ADA includes "appropriate adjustment or 
modifications of examinations" as a form of accommoda-
tion.  It is the goal of this article to acquaint employers 
with the legal requirements and measurement issues that 
must be considered in using selection tests under the ADA.

There are three types of information that must be consid-
ered in using selection tests under the ADA.  First, em-
ployers must be familiar with the legal requirements of the 
ADA and the rationale behind these requirements.  Second, 
employers should be aware of the specific role of their 
tests in helping to select qualified employees (in other 
words, the validity basis for their tests).  Third, employers 
should be familiar with the types of accommodations that 
are most likely to be effective in preserving the reliability 
and validity of the tests for people with various disabilities.

Legal and Regulatory Requirements

Under the ADA, it is discriminatory to use selection criteria 
that screen out or tend to screen out individuals with dis-
abilities unless the criteria are shown to be job-related for 
the position in question and are consistent with business 
necessity.  This is to ensure that tests do not act as barri-
ers to the employment of persons with disabilities unless 
the person is unable to do the job, even with reasonable 
accommodation. 

Employers should design selection criteria for jobs to en-
sure a close fit between the selection criteria and an indi-
vidual's ability to do the job.  A criterion that tends to 
screen out an individual with a disability must be shown to 
be job-related for the position and consistent with business 
necessity.  To be consistent with business necessity a cri-
terion must be related to an essential job function.  The 
obligation to make reasonable accommodation means that 
an employer must make modifications or adjustments to 
the application process that would enable a qualified indi-
vidual with a disability to be considered for the position he 
or she desires. 

Tests should not be given in formats that require use of the 
impaired skill, unless it is a job-related skill that the test is 
intended to measure.  For example, it is unlawful to give a 
written test to a person who is unable to read because of 
dyslexia, unless the ability to read is the job-related skill 
that the test is designed to measure.  If, instead, the test is 
designed to measure a factor such as verbal comprehen-
sion or reasoning, the test should be given orally.  Simi-
larly, test time limits should be relaxed for applicants 
whose disabilities cause them to need more time to take a 
test, unless the test is specifically designed to test speed.  
However, the results of a test of speed could not be used 
to exclude an individual with a disability unless the skill 
was necessary to perform an essential function of the posi-
tion that could not be performed by the individual with or 
without reasonable accommodation.  If speed is necessary 
to perform an essential job function and there is no reason-
able accommodation available to enable the applicant to 
demonstrate the skill or to perform the job, then the em-
ployer is not required to employ the individual.

An employer is obligated to make reasonable accommoda-
tion only to the physical or mental limitations that result 
from the disability of a qualified individual with a disability, 
that are known to the employer.  While an employer may 
inquire whether an employee is having difficulty perform-
ing his or her job, it is generally the responsibility of the 
employee to inform the employer that accommodation for 
a disability is needed.

Similarly, an employer is generally required to provide test-
ing accommodations only if it knows in advance that an 
applicant has a disability that requires such accommoda-
tions.  Usually, it is the responsibility of the individual with 
a disability to request any accommodation for a test.  The 
employer can be helpful by informing applicants in advance 
about any tests to be administered as part of the application 
process, so that they may request an accommodation, if 
needed. 

Employers may also ask applicants whether they will need 
an accommodation for the hiring process.

It should be noted that the ADA and the Title I regulations 
prohibit pre-employment inquiry into a person's disability 
or the nature of the disability, with one narrow exception.  
The ADA permits employers to ask individuals with a hid-
den disability who request accommodations at the applica-
tion stage to provide reasonable documentation to verify 
the disability and the need for accommodation.  However, 
the employer may not make further inquiries as to the na-
ture or severity of the disability.  For this reason, employ-
ers can use psychological tests at the pre-offer state of the 
hiring process only if these tests are not medical-that is to 
say, only if the tests do not provide evidence that would 
lead to identifying a mental disorder. 

Test Validity Models

The use of tests for making employment decisions is sup-
ported by evidence of the tests' validity under one or more 
of the following models:

*  Content validity: the test is a representative sample of 
performance in some defined area of job-related 
knowledge, skill, ability, or other characteristic.

*  Construct validity: the test is demonstrated to be a 
measure of a job-relevant characteristic (e.g., reason-
ing ability).

*  Criterion-related validity: the test is shown to be statis-
tically related to some criterion of successful job per-
formance.

Test accommodations should be made so as to retain the 
validity of the test for selecting qualified employees.

Types of Testing Accommodations

Testing accommodations will be discussed under three 
broad categories: testing formats, time limits, and test con-
tent.  

Testing format.  A change in testing format refers to the 
use of a different medium or method to present the same 
information.   Test information is usually presented in print 
in the English language.  Therefore, Braille, large print, 
reader, and audiotape are simply different ways of present-
ing the same information.  In most cases, these formats 
could be interchanged without a change in the question 
content or the ability being tested. However, several prob-
lem areas exist in the use of different formats:

1.	Long reading passages may be more difficult when 
presented orally or in other formats for visually im-
paired applicants.  For oral presentation, the test-taker 
must try to keep the entire passage in memory.  In 
Braille or large print, scanning through the passage is 
slower than it is with regular print.

2.	Figural material is problematic for people with visual 
impairments.  The embossing of figural material should 
not be viewed as a simple format change, because the 
tactile sense is quite different from the visual sense.

3.	When readers are used, they should be people who 
read well and articulate clearly, and they should prac-
tice reading the test in advance.  They should be 
warned against inadvertently giving clues to the test-
taker when they read.

It should be noted that changing a test from a printed ver-
sion into a sign language version is a translation into an-
other language, rather than simply a change of format.  It 
must be done with all of the care that would be taken in 
translating a test from English into, say, Japanese. 


Time limits.  In most cases of accommodated testing it is 
necessary to change the test's time limits.  Often the 
change in time limits causes a problem in interpreting test 
results.  This problem arises because of the use of 
"speeded power" tests.  In order to understand this prob-
lem, it is necessary to learn a bit of testing terminology.

A pure power test is a test in which everyone has an op-
portunity to attempt to answer every question, and the 
scores are based on how many questions people can an-
swer rather than on how fast they can work.  The pure 
speed test, on the other hand, contains questions of trivial 
difficulty given with a very short time limit.  Scores are 
based only on how fast people can work.  Many tests that 
are intended to be power tests are actually somewhat 
speeded because a considerable number of people are un-
able to attempt every question.  On a speeded power test, a 
person who had unlimited time would have an advantage 
over people who took it with the regular time limit. How-
ever, since many people with disabilities, e.g., Braille users, 
need extra time to take tests, there is the difficult problem 
of determining exactly how much extra time should be 
allotted so that the test-taker with a disability is at neither 
an advantage nor a disadvantage.

The ideal solution to this problem would be to eliminate the 
use of speeded power tests.  If a power test has a liberal 
time limit, with a completion rate of, say, ninety-five per-
cent of all test-takers, then test-takers with disabilities can 
be given unlimited time without having an undue advan-
tage.  The difficult question of how much extra time to 
allow would no longer need to be answered.

In the case of existing speed power tests in which the 
regular time limits cannot be changed, unlimited time may 
be inappropriate. One method of determining appropriate 
time limits is to conduct empirical studies.  The U.S. Of-
fice of Personnel Management conducted a study to set 
time limits for visually impaired and deaf applicants on one 
of its large volume examinations.  It was found that at least 
double time was needed for visually impaired users of all 
media to answer questions that consisted of a short reading 
passage followed by five answer choices. Mathematical 
questions involving computation required considerably 
more time than that.  Such empirical studies are only pos-
sible in large-scale programs in which there are many test-
takers.  

Pure speed tests are used in the employment context to test 
such skills as perceptual speed and clerical checking.  
Such tests are clearly inappropriate for use with visually 
impaired test-takers because all of the media for transmit-
ting information are slower, and for some physically im-
paired applicants, because the physical mechanism for 
responding (e.g., marking the answer sheet) is slower.  
The time limit cannot be adjusted on these tests because 
speed is the factor that is being tested.  Therefore, the test 
user must decide if the speed test should be used with the 
regular time limit (which is permissible, as noted in the 
earlier section on legal and regulatory requirements, if the 
speed factor is necessary to perform an essential job func-
tion and the applicant cannot meet the requirement even 
with reasonable accommodation) or if the test should be 
deleted from the battery and possibly be replaced with an-
other type of assessment.  This would be an instance of 
the last type of test accommodation-change of test con-
tent.
     
Test content.  In the context of competitive testing for 
persons with disabilities, changes in test content are not 
made frequently. However, it is clear that this type of 
change is a form of accommodation that may be required 
for compliance with the ADA. Any change in test content 
would need to be consistent with the validity strategy on 
which the test was based.  For example, substituting one 
test question for another is easily done under a construct 
validity model, but might be troublesome under a content 
validity model.
     
Changes in test content can be divided for convenience 
into three types: change in individual test questions, change 
in the question-type, and change or deletion of a knowl-
edge, skill, or ability (KSA) that is being measured.  The 
first type of change, as mentioned above, is easily done in 
a construct-valid test.  The second type of change-using 
a different type of question to test the same ability-is fea-
sible if another question-type exists and if scoring compa-
rability can be determined. 

The interpretive guidance to the EEOC's Title I ADA regu-
lations describes some bold substitutions of methods for 
measuring the same KSA's, as the following excerpt 
shows:

"Where it is not possible to test in an alternative format, the 
employer may be required, as a reasonable accommo-
dation, to evaluate the skill to be tested in another manner 
(e.g., through an interview, or through education, license, 
or work experience requirements)."

This excerpt does not reflect a concern for score compa-
rability.  In fact, it is difficult to see how this approach 
could be used if applicants needed to be rank-ordered on 
the basis of quantitative scores.

If there is no effective way to test a person with a disabil-
ity for a certain KSA, and if there is reason to believe that 
this KSA will not be required on the job by the person, the 
requirement for measuring this KSA should be changed or 
deleted.
Accommodations for Specific Disabilities

The following is a brief listing of the types of testing ac-
commodations that are appropriate for test-takers with 
different disabilities.

For test-takers with visual impairments, tests must be pre-
sented in appropriate formats, such as braille, large print, 
and audiotape. Time limits must be extended for all of 
these media, and speed tests are inappropriate.  Within the 
context of changing test materials into different formats, 
certain types of test material may be problematic, as noted 
earlier.  In addition, the test-taker will probably need ac-
commodation or assistance in marking answers.     

For test-takers who have physical impairments that affect 
use of the hands, the principal test accommodation is the 
adjustment of test time limits and the avoidance of speed 
tests.  In addition, accessible test sites, the assistance of a 
test administrator in turning pages and marking answers, 
and extra rest breaks may be required. 
     
Among hearing impaired test-takers, only those who are 
deaf need extensive testing accommodations.  For the ma-
jority of prelingually deaf persons, that is, persons who lost 
their hearing before acquiring speech, verbal tests are not 
good measures of any ability.  For most pre-lingual deaf 
people, English is a second language and the native lan-
guage is sign language.  (Of course, there are exceptions to 
this rule; some prelingually deaf people have very good 
English skills.)  Therefore, as a general rule, verbal tests 
cannot be used effectively with most deaf test-takers to 
test anything except verbal ability.  Tests that are com-
pletely nonverbal, however, do not pose a problem.  Test 
instructions should be given very carefully, with the use of 
sign language or demonstration, and time limits should be 
explained clearly.  Extra time should be allowed on power 
tests that include verbal material.

Individuals with specific learning disabilities now constitute 
the largest group that requires testing accommodations.  
The specific tasks that are affected by learning disabilities 
vary widely, so it is difficult to generalize about testing 
accommodations.  Accommodations will need to be ar-
ranged on a case-by-case basis for applicants with specific 
learning disabilities.  The most frequently used accommo-
dations are the allowance of additional time for power tests 
and reconsideration of speed tests in areas of specific 
weakness.  For example, a test- taker who had a specific 
learning disability that affected numerical computation 
might be screened out by a speeded test of computation.  
Under the ADA, it would be inappropriate to use that test 
unless it tested an essential job function that the test-taker 
could not perform with or without reasonable accommoda-
tion.

Resources

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical As-
sistance Center Hotline (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY)

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 1801 L 
Street, NW, Washington, DC  20507,
(800) 669-4000 (Voice) to reach EEOC field offices; for 
publications call 
(800) 800-3302 or (800) 669-EEOC (voice/TTY).

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell Univer-
sity.  It was updated in July, 2000,  by Mary Anne Nester, 
Ph.D., U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, Washing-
ton D.C.,  from the original, which she wrote in 1997. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials Develop-
ment Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of the 
ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the devel-
opment of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific Disabil-
ity and Business Technical Assistance Center, and other sup-
porters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disabil-
ity and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also 
conducting employment policy and practices research, exam-
ining private and federal sector employer responses to dis-
ability civil rights legislation.  This research has been funded 
by the U.S. Department of Education National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on Employ-
ment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer

This material was produced by the Program on Employment 
and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-
Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant 
from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for accu-
racy.  However, opinions about the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of the author, 
and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal Em-
ployment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The 
Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its 
ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification 
of various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  
Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing 
and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  
http://www.eeoc.gov .

Pre-Employment Testing and The ADA
July, 2000	CORNELL UNIVERSITY
