The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and Injured Workers

What is the Americans with Disabilities Act?

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) is civil 
rights legislation that extends to persons with disabilities the 
same protection against discrimination that has been in place 
for other persons on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, 
national origin, and age.  The ADA covers all aspects of 
participation in society - employment, public 
accommodations, transportation, and telecommunications.  
The employment provisions of the ADA (Title I) prohibit 
discrimination against persons with disabilities in all facets of 
employment, including recruitment, pre-employment 
screening, hiring, training, promotions, employee benefits, 
layoffs and terminations.  The ADA also requires employers 
to provide necessary reasonable accommodations as a form 
of nondiscrimination.  Employers, human resource 
professionals, and labor union representatives need to be 
knowledgeable about the ADA in order to respond 
appropriately to accommodation requests by workers with 
disabilities and otherwise ensure compliance with the ADA's 
requirements.  Title I of the ADA is enforced by the U.S. 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).

When will the ADA Impact Injured Workers?

Anytime a worker sustains a significant injury, the ADA may 
come into play.  Title I of the ADA covers private 
employers, and state and local governments, with 15 or 
more employees for each working day in 20 or more 
calendar weeks in the current or preceding year.  The 
definition of "employer" includes persons who are "agents" 
of the employer such as managers, supervisors, foremen, or 
others who act for the employer, such as agencies used to 
conduct background checks on candidates.  Employment 
agencies, labor organizations, and joint labor management 
committees must also comply with Title I of the ADA.

When dealing with injured workers, including previously 
injured applicants, employers must take into account both 
state workers' compensation laws and federal ADA 
requirements.  Employers should be particularly alert to 
possible ADA issues in the areas of hiring and pre-
employment medical exams, workplace injuries and 
employee medical exams, confidentiality of medical 
information and the provision of reasonable 
accommodations. 

Is an Injured Worker Automatically Covered under the 
ADA?

No. Whether an injured worker is protected by the ADA will 
depend on whether the person meets the ADA's 
jurisdictional definition of "disability."  Under the ADA, the 
term "disability" is defined as a physical or mental 
impairment that substantially limits a major life activity, or a 
record of such an impairment, or being regarded as having 
such an impairment.  Some impairments resulting from 
occupational injury may not be severe enough to 
substantially limit a major life activity, or they may only be 
temporary, and have little or no long-term impact.

Likewise, just because an individual has a record of filing a 
workers' compensation claim does not necessarily mean 
s/he is covered under the "record" portion of the definition.  
The record or history must be of an impairment that 
substantially limited one or more major life activities. 

When is an Injured Worker Regarded as Disabled 
under the ADA?

An injured worker has a disability under the "regarded as" 
portion of the definition if s/he (1) has an impairment that 
does not substantially limit a major life activity but the 
employer treats him/her as though the impairment is 
substantially limiting; (2) has an impairment that substantially 
limits a major life activity because of the attitudes of others 
towards the impairment; (3) has no impairment, but is 
treated as though s/he has a substantially limiting impairment. 

Example 1:  During an office move, an employee sustains an 
occupational injury resulting in a temporary back condition 
that precludes him from heavy lifting.  The employer views 
this person as not being able to lift even a few pounds and 
refuses to return him to his position even though he is fully 
capable of doing his job, which only requires the lifting of 
ordinary light weight items such as a book or small package 
of paper.  This person would qualify as having an ADA 
disability. 

Example 2:  An employee sustains serious burns to her face 
during an on-the-job laboratory accident.  The person is fully 
able to return to her duties as a scientist, however, the 
employer refuses to return her to her position because it 
fears the negative reaction of co-workers or clients.  The 
employer regards her as having an impairment that 
substantially limits the major life activity of interacting with 
others and working.  This employee would have a disability 
as defined by the ADA. 

Example 3:  An individual has fully recovered from a back 
injury.  He applies for a new job and the employer refuses to 
hire him because it assumes that the person will severely 
injure his back again if he returns to heavy labor.  The 
employer is regarding this applicant as being disqualified 
from the class of jobs involving heavy labor, and thus 
substantially limited in the major life activity of working. 

Even if an employee is awarded workers' compensation 
benefits, or is assigned a high workers' compensation 
disability rating, it is necessary to make a case-by-case 
determination of whether the person is an individual with a 
disability under the ADA.

The other important prerequisite for ADA coverage is that 
the person must be qualified for the job.  An injured 
employee or job applicant is considered qualified if s/he 
meets the education, experience and other qualification 
standards of the job, and is able to perform the essential 
functions of the job, with or without reasonable 
accommodation. 

Does the ADA Limit an Employer's Ability to Find Out 
About a Person's Prior Workers' Compensation 
History?
 
Yes.  The ADA limits when an employer may ask about prior 
workers' compensation claims.  At the pre-offer stage, an 
employer may not ask about an applicant's disabilities or ask 
questions that are likely to elicit information about disability, 
including questions about workers' compensation history.  
An employer also may not obtain workers' compensation 
information at the pre-offer stage from third parties, such as 
former employers, state workers' compensation offices or 
services that provide workers' compensation information.  
At the post-offer, pre-employment stage, an employer may 
make disability-related inquiries, including questions about 
workers' compensation, and may require medical exams as 
long as certain individuals are not being singled out.  

What are the ADA Requirements Regarding Pre-
Employment Medical Examinations and Disability-
Related Inquiries, Including Questions about Workers' 
Compensation?

It is illegal for an employer to make disability-related inquiries 
or require a medical examination of applicants prior to 
extending a job offer.  As noted above, this includes 
questions about a person's workers' compensation history.

However, after making a conditional offer of employment, 
but before employment has begun, an employer may ask 
about a person's medical and workers' compensation history 
or require a medical examination to obtain information about 
the existence or nature of an applicant's prior occupational 
injuries, as long as the inquiry or exam is required of all 
entering employees in the same job category.  After an 
employer has obtained basic medical information from all 
entering employees in a job category, it may ask specific 
individuals to take follow-up examinations and/or answer 
more questions if examinations and inquiries are medically 
related to the previously obtained medical information. 

If the employer withdraws a job offer because the medical 
examination reveals that the person does not satisfy certain 
qualification standards, including safety, vision, or hearing 
requirements, or did not pass certain job tests, the employer 
must be able to show that:

*  the exclusionary criteria do not screen out on the basis 
of disability; or

*  the exclusionary criteria are job-related and consistent 
with business necessity, and that there is no reasonable 
accommodation that will permit the individual with a 
disability to perform the essential functions of the job.  

EEOC takes the position that safety requirements must meet 
the "direct threat" standard in order to be job-related and 
consistent with business necessity.

What if the Employer Thinks the Person's Disability or 
Prior Occupational Injury will Pose an Increased Risk 
of Workers' Compensation Costs?

An employer may not refuse to hire a person with a disability 
simply because it assumes the disability will pose an 
increased risk of occupational injury and increased workers' 
compensation costs.  Similarly, an employer may not refuse 
to hire an individual with a disability who has had a previous 
occupational injury based on generalized assumptions or 
stereotypes.  Excluding workers with disabilities because of 
their disability or a previous on-the-job injury is disability 
discrimination, unless the employer can establish a direct 
threat.  

An employer may refuse to hire a person for a particular job 
only if that person would pose a direct threat in that position. 
 "Direct threat" means a significant threat of substantial 
harm to workplace health or safety that cannot be eliminated 
or reduced with reasonable accommodation.  This is a very 
high standard to meet and must be based on a factual, 
individualized inquiry that takes into account the specific 
circumstances of the individual with a disability and the job 
at issue.

Example:    An employee is afflicted with post-traumatic 
stress disorder, which caused him to lose his concentration 
and memory. He applies for a job driving a truck loaded with 
highly flammable gasoline.  The employer determines that he 
presents a direct threat to workplace and public health and 
safety and that he is not qualified for an "extremely 
dangerous" position of driving this truck, with or without 
accommodation. This would not violate the ADA.

What About Medical Exams or Disability-Related 
Inquiries at the Time of Injury or When the Person 
Wants to Return to Work?

The ADA allows an employee to ask disability-related 
questions or require a medical examination at the time an 
employee experiences an occupational injury or seeks to 
return to work after such an injury as long as the inquiries or 
medical exams are job-related and consistent with business 
necessity.  This requirement is met where an employer 
reasonably believes that the occupational injury will impair 
the employee's ability to perform essential functions or 
raises legitimate concerns about direct threat.  The questions 
or exams must not exceed the scope of the specific injury 
and its effect on the employee's ability, with or without 
reasonable accommodation, to perform essential functions or 
to work without posing a direct threat.  

Does the ADA Impact How an Employer Determines its 
Workers' Compensation Liability?

The ADA does not prohibit an employer from asking 
disability-related questions or requiring medical exams of 
employees seeking workers' compensation that are 
necessary to ascertain the extent of its workers' 
compensation liability.  The questions and exams must be 
consistent with the state law's purpose of determining 
eligibility for workers' compensation benefits.  Examinations 
and questions must be limited in scope to the specific 
occupational injury and may not be required more often than 
is necessary to determine an individual's initial or continued 
eligibility for workers' compensation benefits.  

With Whom Can Medical Records be Shared?

Information obtained from permitted medical examinations 
and disability-related inquiries is a "confidential medical 
record," and shall be collected and maintained on separate 
forms and in separate medical files.  This includes 
information about an applicant's or employee's occupational 
injury or workers' compensation claim.  Access to the file 
and the information contained in it must be strictly limited 
and disclosed only under the following circumstances:

*  supervisors and managers may be informed regarding 
necessary restrictions on the work or duties of the 
employee and necessary accommodations;

*  first-aid safety personnel may be informed, when 
appropriate, if the disability might require emergency 
treatment;

*  government officials investigating compliance with the 
ADA shall be provided relevant information on request;
*  employers may give information to state workers' 
compensation offices, state second injury funds, and 
workers' compensation insurance carriers in accordance 
with state workers' compensation laws;

*  employers may use the information for insurance 
purposes.

May the Employer Require that a Person with a 
Disability-Related Occupational Injury Return to Full 
Duty?

No.  The term full duty may include both marginal and 
essential functions.  The employee with a disability-related 
occupational injury  must be allowed to return to work as 
long as s/he can perform the essential functions of the 
position and does not pose a direct threat. 

What About Return-to-Work Concerns Regarding 
Future Injury or Increased Workers' Compensation 
Costs?

The employer may not refuse to return to work an employee 
with a disability-related occupational injury because of 
assumptions about future injury or increased workers' 
compensation costs.  The employer would have to establish 
that this person currently would pose a direct threat in the 
position in order to justify the decision not to allow the 
person to return. 

May an Employer Refuse to Return to Work an 
Employee With a Workers' Compensation Rating of 
"Totally Disabled?"

No.  Workers' compensation laws are different in purpose 
from the ADA and use different standards.  A workers' 
compensation determination of total or permanent disability 
is never dispositive of the question of whether a person can 
return to work under the ADA.  It may, however, provide 
relevant evidence about whether the person can perform the 
essential functions of the job, with or without reasonable 
accommodation, and without posing a direct threat.


Who Makes the Return-to-Work Decision?

The employer is ultimately responsible for deciding whether 
an employee with a disability-related occupational injury is 
able to return to work.  The employer may find it helpful to 
obtain information from a rehabilitation counselor, physician, 
or other specialist regarding the employee's specific 
functional limitations, abilities, and possible reasonable 
accommodations.  The employer may also obtain useful 
information from others who are not experts but who have 
knowledge about the employee's current abilities, limitations 
and use of reasonable accommodations.

What are the ADA's Reasonable Accommodation 
Requirements in the Context of an Occupational 
Injury?

The ADA requires that an employer make reasonable 
accommodation to the known physical or mental limitations 
of a qualified individual with a disability, unless the employer 
can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an 
undue hardship.  Reasonable accommodation is a 
modification or adjustment to a job, the work environment or 
the way things are usually done that enables a qualified 
individual with a disability to enjoy an equal employment 
opportunity.  Other brochures in this series discuss the 
reasonable accommodation obligation at length.  Our 
discussion here focuses on common questions about 
reasonable accommodation following a disability-related 
occupational injury. 

The ADA does not require an employer to provide a 
reasonable accommodation for an employee with an 
occupational injury who does not have an ADA disability.   
The employer does have the duty of reasonable accommo-
dation, however, if the employee has a disability-related 
occupational injury.  

Leave

If the employee has a disability-related occupational injury 
that leaves him/her temporarily unable to work, the employer 
may not discharge him/her and must provide leave, as long 
as this does not impose an undue hardship.  The employee 
would be entitled to return to his/her same position unless 
the employer can show that keeping the position would be an 
undue hardship.  If the employer makes this showing, the 
employer must then consider whether there is a vacant 
equivalent position to which the individual could be 
reassigned for the remaining months of necessary leave.  

If the employee requests leave as a reasonable 
accommodation, but the employer can instead provide an 
accommodation that keeps the employee working, the 
employer is not required under the ADA to provide the leave. 
 But, if the employee simply requests leave that is routinely 
granted to other employees, the employer may not require 
this employee to remain on the job unless it also requires 
employees without disabilities to remain on the job with 
some type of adjustment.   Furthermore, if the employee 
qualifies for leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act 
(FMLA), the employer may not require him/her to remain on 
the job with an adjustment instead of taking a leave of 
absence.  

On-the-Job Accommodations

If the employee with a disability-related occupational injury is 
still able to perform the essential functions of the job, but 
cannot perform certain marginal functions, the employer 
must restructure the job by reallocating or redistributing the 
marginal functions that the person cannot do because of the 
disability.  Reassignment to an equivalent, vacant position, on 
either a permanent or temporary basis, is a last resort when 
the person cannot be accommodated in the current position 
through job restructuring, modification of equipment or a 
part-time schedule.  If there is no equivalent position 
available, reassignment to a lower position should be 
considered.  The employer and employee may agree to a 
reassignment at any point, however, if both parties think this 
is best.  If there is no open position for the employee with 
the disability-related occupational injury, the employer is not 
required to create a position or "bump" another employee 
from his/her position.

An employer will not satisfy its ADA reasonable 
accommodation obligation by placing an employee with a 
disability-related occupational injury in a workers' 
compensation vocational rehabilitation program.  However, if 
both the employer and employee agree that this is the best 
course of action, they are free to choose it.  

An employer is also free to make a workplace modification 
that is not required under the ADA in order to offset 
workers' compensation costs.  For example, an employer 
might choose to temporarily lower production standards, 
which is not required by the ADA, in order to return an 
occupationally-injured employee to work sooner.

Light Duty

The term "light duty" has a number of different meanings in 
the employment setting.  EEOC uses the term to mean 
particular positions created specifically for the purpose of 
providing work for employees who are unable to perform all 
of their normal duties. 

An employer may feel a special obligation arising out of the 
employment relationship to create a light duty position for an 
employee who is injured on the job. The EEOC has stated 
that nothing in the ADA prohibits an employer from creating 
a light duty job for an employee who is injured on the job, so 
long as the policy is applied in a non-discriminatory way to 
all employees including those with disabilities.  

The ADA does not require an employer to create "light duty" 
positions for a non-occupationally injured employee with a 
disability.  The general principal that the ADA does not 
require the creation of positions applies equally to the 
creation of light duty jobs.  Note, however, that if the "heavy 
duty" tasks an injured worker can no longer perform are 
marginal job functions, they would have to be reallocated to 
coworkers as part of the reasonable accommodation of job 
restructuring.  

If an employer chooses to create light duty positions for 
workers injured on the job, the employer also determines 
everything about the positions, including the length of time 
they are available.  Thus, if an employer only provides 
temporary light duty positions, it need only provide a 
temporary light duty position to an employee with a 
disability-related occupational injury.

The EEOC makes a distinction between the creation of a 
light duty position, which is not required under the ADA, and 
the placement of a non-occupationally-injured employee with 
an ADA disability into existing light duty positions that are 
reserved for employees that are injured on the job.  The 
EEOC takes the position that if an employee with a disability 
who is not occupationally injured becomes unable to perform 
the essential functions of his/her job, and there is no other 
effective reasonable accommodation, the employer must 
reassign him or her to a vacant reserved light duty position 
as a reasonable accommodation.  The EEOC has also stated 
that an employer could not establish undue hardship by 
showing that it would not have any light duty positions 
remaining if another employee was subsequently injured on 
the job.  

At least one court has disagreed with the EEOC position, 
stating that an employer could reserve light duty positions 
for employees recuperating from recent injuries who had 
temporary disabilities.   

Does Filing a Workers' Compensation Claim Prevent 
an Injured Worker from Filing a Charge Under the 
ADA?
 
Filing a workers compensation claim does not prevent an 
injured worker from filing a charge under the ADA.  "Exclu-
sivity" clauses in state workers' compensation laws bar all 
other civil remedies related to an injury that has been 
compensated by a workers' compensation system.  
However, these clauses do not prohibit a qualified individual 
with a disability from filing a discrimination charge with the 
EEOC or filing a suit under the ADA, if s/he is issued a 
"right to sue" letter by the EEOC.

Where Can I Go to Get More Information on These 
Issues?

The organizations listed below can provide you with further 
information on the employment provisions of the Americans 
with Disabilities Act of 1990:1

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY).

Job Accommodation Network,
918 Chestnut Ridge Road, Suite 1, Morgantown, WV 26506-
6080, 
(800) ADA-WORK (voice/TTY).

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 
1801 L Street, NW
Washington, DC  20507

To be connected to the nearest field office, call (800) 669-
4000 (voice), (800) 669-6820 (TTY). To order publications, 
call (800) 669-3362 (voice), (800) 800-3302 (TTY).  For 
on-line information, including the EEOC Enforcement 
Guidance: Workers' Compensation and the ADA, go to: 
http://www.eeoc.gov

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University.  
It was updated in September, 2001 by Sheila D. Duston, an 
attorney-mediator practicing in the Washington, DC 
metropolitan area  from the original, which was written in 
1997 by Bruce Growick. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials Development 
Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of the ADA 
(Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of 
new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on 
Employment and Disability and the Pacific Disability and 
Business Technical Assistance Center.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disability 
and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also 
conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National Institute 
on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org.

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment and 
Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension 
Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant from the 
National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for 
accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of the 
author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The 
Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its 
ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification of 
various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  
Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing and 
downloading from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 

  An individual with a disability may have an occupational injury that 
has nothing to do with his disability.  EEOC uses the term "disability-
related occupational injury" to refer to a situation where the ADA and 
workers' compensation laws simultaneously apply (i.e., where there is 
a connection between an occupational injury and a disability as defined 
under the ADA).
  29 C.F.R. Section 825.702(d)(1) (2001).  In general, when any sort of 
leave issue arises in an ADA case, employers need to be aware that 
they may also have FMLA obligations. For on-line information about 
the FMLA, go to: http://www.dol.gov/dol/esa/flma.htm 
  The EEOC leaves open the possibility that should this policy have a 
disparate impact on a class of individuals with disabilities, the employer 
would have to show that the policy is job-related and consistent with 
business necessity.
  Dalton v. Subaru-Isuzu, 141 F.3d 667 (7th Cir. 1998).

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and Injured Workers
September 2001	CORNELL UNIVERSITY
