Causes of Poor Indoor 
Air Quality and What 
You Can Do About It


What Are The Typical Symptoms Of Poor Indoor 
Air Quality? 

*  irritations of eyes, nose, and throat 
*  dry mucous membranes and skin
*  erythema (reddening of the skin; rashes)
*  mental fatigue, headache, and sleepiness
*  airway infections, cough
*  hoarseness, wheezing
*  nausea, dizziness
*  unspecific hypersensitivity reactions

Exposure to poor air quality usually does not result in a 
rapid, acute onset of symptoms; rather, there are slow, 
subtle effects.  The symptoms are often subjective, and 
other problems/stresses (including heat stress) may 
aggravate the problem.  Some individuals may be 
particularly sensitive.  Since people exposed to poor 
indoor air quality frequently experience subjective 
symptoms, they are often viewed as over-emotional or 
simply complainers - so it is important to place this 
problem on a scientific basis so as to be able to take a 
more constructive, problem-solving approach.

What Is Poor Indoor Air Quality? 
An indoor air quality problem (also called "sick building 
syndrome") consists of the complaints, symptoms, and 
illnesses believed to be related to contaminants 
concentrated within buildings.  With over 52 million 
office workers in the United States, plus teachers and 
students in school buildings, health care professionals 
and patients in hospitals, residents in apartments, the 
homeowner, and many others, there is a large 
population potentially affected.  In fact, indoor air is an 
issue, which impacts on the health and productivity of 
the majority of all working adults and the vast majority 
of working women. 

What Are The Causes Of Poor Indoor Air Quality? 
*  inadequate fresh air supply and/or poor 
ventilation system maintenance
*  pollutants given off by building or furnishing 
materials
*  pollutants from processes occurring within the 
building, including cleaning products, office 
machines, pesticides, off gases from new 
materials
*  micro-organismal contaminants, or,
*  contaminants brought into the building from 
outside.

When building ventilation is inadequate, the resulting 
low air-exchange rate is such that there is insufficient 
fresh air brought into the building to dilute or flush out 
contaminants and they can become concentrated within 
the building.  Improving indoor air quality does not 
mean that the indoor air must become pristine and pure, 
but rather that building occupants should not be 
subjected to air quality that is significantly worse than 
the air outside.

How Do You Find Out If Your Building Has An 
Indoor Air Quality Problem? 
Gather information from building occupants.  When 
investigating complaints of indoor air quality, it is impor-
tant to determine the nature of the complaints and extent 
of the problem.  This can be accomplished by surveying 
the people who work and live in and who visit the 
building.  When collecting information:

*  review the records of complaints; if there are no 
existing records, create a complaint log
*  interview the occupants, either directly or by the 
use of a questionnaire, or both
*  avoid asking questions that might be unnecessarily 
intrusive (for example, health or medical questions 
concerning reproductive history or psychological 
problems).
*  ask occupants to document their observations in 
an occupant diary.

Check out the ventilation system.  Find out if there is 
enough fresh air being brought into the building.  The 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) 62-1999 
recommends that office spaces have 20 cubic feet per 
minute (cfm)/person of outdoor air provided. Verify this 
with carbon dioxide measurements; outside there is 
about 300-500 ppm of carbon dioxide.  Inside, the 
carbon dioxide should be less than 1000 ppm or no 
more than 700 ppm higher than the outside air 
concentration.  Examine the intakes and exhausts for 
contamination and cross-contamination; verify this with 
carbon monoxide or other measurements as 
appropriate.  For any monitoring performed, measure 
the same items in the outdoor air for comparison 
purposes.  Be careful in the choice of method used so 
as to obtain a low enough detection limit as to be able 
to compare indoor with outdoor air.  Check out the 
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system's 
performance and maintenance.  Walk through the 
building and look for signs of leaks and water damage.  
Check the chemical usage in the building and look for 
potential sources of air contaminants.  Make any 
corrections necessary as a result of these examinations 
and then re-survey the building inhabitants to see if 
conditions have improved and if any problems remain. 

Usually these steps are enough, but sometimes further 
monitoring is needed.  If the corrections to ventilation or 
contaminant sources do not fix the problem or if the 
ventilation system was adequate, it may become 
necessary to proceed further to better identify the 
specific contaminants and their possible sources, such 
as: microbial monitoring (with identification of the 
bacteria and molds), measurement of particulates (with  
identification of particles and fibers), or chemical 
analysis for air contaminants (such as formaldehyde, 
ozone, pesticides, volatile solvents).  And, as above, 
take outdoor measurements as well and compare 
indoor air with outdoor air.   

Consider whether the expense of this additional 
monitoring is justified; it may be far more cost-effective 
to remove the contaminant source than to pay for the 
testing.  Consider whether these additional data will 
make a difference in the decision to fix or not fix a 
potential problem.  If you are going to fix it anyway, are 
the data needed to confirm that exposure happened or 
are the data a waste of the funds which could be used 
to fix the problem?
 
Keep building occupants informed.  Building occupants 
should be kept informed during the entire process of 
investigation and mitigation, including:
*  how the investigation is progressing, the types of 
information being gathered, and ways that they 
can help the process along
*  the nature of the health problems being reported; 
this enables occupants to put their symptoms into 
perspective
*  how long the investigation is expected to  last
*  any attempts that are made to improve indoor air 
quality
*  any remaining work that needs to be done and 
the schedule for its completion. 

If the above described investigation appears to indicate 
that an indoor quality problem exists, a qualified expert 
should be consulted to make appropriate 
recommendations for remediation.  Such an expert 
could include an industrial hygienist, ventilation engineer 
with IAQ experience, HVAC contractor with IAQ 
experience, safety risk manager with IAQ experience, 
or other similarly qualified consultant.

What Can You Do To Correct Poor Indoor Air 
Quality Problems? 
If ventilation is inadequate, increase the fresh air supply 
to meet the recommendations of Standard 62-1999 of 
the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE).  This industry 
standard recommends ventilation needs in terms of the 
amount of cubic feet per minute per person of fresh air 
for rooms and buildings depending upon their usage.  
For office space, it recommends 20 cfm/person of 
outdoor air.  Check to make sure that the air intakes 
and exhausts for each room are functioning. Ventilation 
adequacy can be verified by measuring the air 
concentration of carbon dioxide during occupancy.

If indoor sources are the problem, choose alternative 
products or eliminate the use of troublesome products.  
Schedule product usage or construction/remodeling for 
times when it will have the least impact on occupants.  
Consider changing schedules or using flextime or time 
off for sensitive individuals such as those who are 
pregnant or who have allergies, respiratory, 
cardiovascular, or other problems that the exposure 
could adversely affect.  Provide better ventilation or 
local exhaust ventilation for specific contaminant 
sources.  Ban smoking in the building or provide a 
smoking lounge with smoke vented to the outside away 
from any air intakes.  Consider increased ventilation or 
baking off for new materials or remodeled areas.  
Baking-off is a technique for speeding up the off-
gassing of new materials by heating the room, wing, or 
building (as appropriate) to about 80-85 Fahrenheit for 
about 12 hours; then drop the air temperature as low as 
possible for the next 12 hours and ventilate during this 
cooling cycle.  The heating/cooling cycles can be 
repeated several times.

If outside sources are the problem, separate air intakes 
from exhausts or raise exhausts higher to prevent 
exhaust air from being drawn back inside.  Prevent 
vehicles from idling for long periods of time near air 
intakes.  Separate a garage's part of the ventilation 
system from that servicing the rest of the building. Verify 
air pressure in the building relative to outside; a building 
under negative pressure could cause drains, sanitary 
stacks, or exhaust vents to run backwards.

If biological contamination is the problem, make sure 
there is adequate cleaning and maintenance of air 
intakes, filters, and ductwork.  Fix leaks, condensation, 
and standing water in the building or the ventilation 
system.  Have the condensation from coils or air 
conditioners go to a floor drain.  Discard 
water-damaged items and those with porous surfaces.  
Disinfect nonporous materials.

If building fabric is the problem, baking off may help.  
Check insulation to verify its proper installation; verify 
with appropriate air monitoring.


Reasonable Accommodation Under The ADA For 
Someone Who Needs Better Air Quality (Even 
After Corrections Are Done) 
In striving to make the indoor environment not 
significantly different from the outdoor environment, the 
building air quality may reach the limit of what is feasible 
for a whole building performance approach.  Despite 
the best efforts to improve ventilation and remove 
sources of contaminants, you may discover that the 
individuals who meet the definition of disability under 
the ADA due to very sensitive allergies or an 
environmental illness still require some form of 
reasonable accommodation to be able to perform their 
job.  The following are some options, which could be 
considered:

(1) Consider removing from a room any chemical 
challenges by stripping the room of any items which 
could be a problem, such as carpeting or pressed 
wood products, and provide a plain floor, a metal 
desk, minimal use of solvent-based products, no air 
fresheners, no pesticides, etc.

(2) Consider the use of a room-sized  air-cleaning unit 
having a carbon filter and high efficiency particulate air 
filter (HEPA) capable of removing the problem 
contaminants.  Be sure the unit is large enough to 
handle the air volume needs for the size of the room.

(3) Consider moving the person to a different work 
environment such as a different room, wing, or 
building that has not had recent remodeling or that 
uses a different HVAC system.

Resources 

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline - (800) 949-4232

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 1801 L 
Street NW, Washington, DC 20507, (800) 669-4000 (voice); 
(800) 800-3302 (TTY); or (800) 666-EEOC (publications). 

Your local Department of Health at the state or county 
level.

USEPA, Indoor Air Division, Office of Air and Radiation, 
401 M Street SW, Washington, DC 20460, (703) 308-8470.

USDHHS - NIOSH, Division of Surveillance, Hazard 
Evaluations and Field Studies, 4676 Columbia Parkway, 
Cincinnati, OH 45226, (513) 841-4428.

Workplace Health and Safety  Program, Cornell 
University, School of Industrial and Labor Relations, 237 
Main St. - Suite 1200, Buffalo, NY 14203 (716) 852-4191

National Center for Environmental Health Strategies, 
1100 Rural Avenue, 
Voorhees, NJ 08043, (609) 429-5358

Human Ecology Action League, P.O. Box 49126, Atlanta, 
GA 30359-1126, (404) 248-1898.

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  This publication was written in 1994 and 
updated in February 2002 by Nellie J. Brown, M.S., CIH, 
Statewide Director, Workplace Health and Safety Program, 
New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations, 
Cornell University, 237 Main St. - Suite 1200 Buffalo, New 
York 14203, (716) 852-4191.  

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org


Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment 
and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-
Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant 
from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for 
accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of 
the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  
The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in 
its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification 
of various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  
Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing 
and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  
http://www.eeoc.gov 

February, 2002	CORNELL UNIVERSITY
