Accommodating the Allergic Employee in the Workplace 


Defining the Allergic Employee 

An allergy is an overreaction of the immune system to 
food, dust, pollen, or other element.  The function of the 
immune system is to recognize and eliminate agents that 
are harmful to the host.  When the immune system is 
functioning properly, the foreign agents are eliminated 
quickly and efficiently.  Occasionally, the immune system 
responds adversely to environmental agents, resulting in an 
allergic reaction.  When the immune system hyper-reacts, 
the response is out of proportion to, and more harmful 
than, the initial threat of the substance.

Hypersensitivity, or allergy, is not due to an alteration of 
the immune system by a foreign substance, but is an 
inappropriate activation of the immune system.  So an 
allergy is a normal immune response with deleterious 
consequences, such as allergic rhinitis, hay fever, or 
contact sensitivity.  In some of these cases, the response 
can be the source of tissue damage, so that suppressing 
certain immune reactions actually reduces tissue injury.  
Once sensitized, the affected individual becomes more 
sensitive to lower concentrations.  This brochure will not 
discuss all of the various types of allergic reactions an 
individual might have, but several deserve mention.

One type occurs when antibodies bind to the environmental 
agent (antigen), which has been taken into the body or 
makes contact with the skin or mucous membranes.  The 
binding reaction causes the body to release chemicals that 
produce dilation of the blood vessels, and release fluid, 
causing swelling and inflammation.  The main targets of 
this type of reaction are the skin, producing urticaria 
(hives), and atopic dermatitis (rash); the respiratory 
system, producing rhinitis (inflamed nasal passages) and 
asthma; the vasculature, causing anaphylactic shock; and 
the gastrointestinal tract, causing food allergies.  These 
responses are called immediate hypersensitivity because 
they usually occur quickly after reexposure to an antigen to 
which the individual has been sensitized.  

Delayed hypersensitivity does not involve antibodies; 
instead specialized types of white blood cells produce an 
inflammatory reaction.  The target for this type of reaction 
can be almost any organ, but the classic example is the 
skin, as in the case of contact dermatitis.

Anaphylactic shock is a life-threatening allergic condition in 
which a reaction takes place all through the body 
immediately after exposure to an antigen to which the 
person is sensitive.  The reaction causes the release of 
body chemicals that make the arteries and veins dilate, 
greatly reducing blood pressure in the arteries, and also 
causes a rapid loss of fluid from the blood and into the 
tissue spaces.  The resulting shock can produce death 
within minutes.

Allergies to Workplace Exposures

Hypersensitivity from environmental exposures in the 
workplace can produce respiratory disorders, skin 
disorders, or anaphylactic shock.  Numerous inhalants 
cause immune-mediated respiratory disorders, including 
some types of bronchial asthma, hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis, allergic rhinitis, and broncho-pulmonary 
aspergillosis.  Immune system involvement has also been 
seen for silicosis, asbestosis, coal workers' 
pneumoconiosis, and possibly byssinosis.  Allergic 
reactions of the skin include allergic contact dermatitis (red 
rashes, swelling, itching, and sometimes blisters).

Although almost anyone can develop an allergy, a distinct 
segment (15 - 20 percent) of the population is clinically 
atopic (unusually reactive to a variety of substances).  
Some individuals could have genetic differences that might 
predispose them to allergies to certain environmental and 
occupational antigens.  Generally, however, the individual 
who develops occupational asthma is not unusually 
reactive.  This person may not have symptoms at work, 
but may have a delayed response in the evening or at night. 
 Characteristically, the individual develops the symptoms of 
asthma, which include wheezing, shortness of breath, 
cough, and sometimes chest tightness.  The symptoms 
improve away from work, but get worse upon return to 
work.

Identifying the Sensitizer in the Work Environment 

There is an enormous range of potential allergens in the 
workplace.  Documented cases involve a large number of 
substances, even though the numbers of people affected 
by any one substance may be very small.  Below are listed 
some industrial chemicals that have been documented as 
producing allergic reactions.

Some common industrial chemicals associated with 
occupational asthma include:

Platinum salts
Nickel salts
Pyrethrum (used as the bases of some insecticides)
Diisocyanates (such as toluene diisocyanate or TDI)
Ethylenediamine
Phthalic anhydrides
Colophony resins (derived from pine resin)
Exotic wood dusts
Latex

Some common contact sensitizers of the skin include:

Poison ivy		European primrose
Benzocaine		Epoxy Resins
Mercaptan		Picric acid derivatives
Ethylenediamine	Formaldehyde
Thimerosol		Beryllium
Nickel			Cadmium
Chromates		Silver
Zirconium		Metalworking fluids
Paraphenylenediamine
Carbon-iodine hydrocarbon compounds
Latex

Occupational Exposure Limits and the Sensitive 
Worker

It would be most helpful in solving a workplace exposure 
problem if the specific allergen could be identified and the 
nature and extent of the exposure documented so that it 
could be addressed or reduced.  Immunotoxicologists have 
identified many substances that have demonstrable 
immunotoxic effects in laboratory animals. In a few 
instances the effects of these substances have been 
observed in humans as well.  Occupational experience has 
provided some evidence of substances' effects in humans. 
 For the most part, however, data are sparse on the effects 
of general exposure to immunotoxicants in the 
environment, although the scientific community does 
recognize that the immune system is an important target 
organ for toxicity.

Several federal activities are designed to enhance public 
awareness of the hazards of toxic substances. The 
Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA)'s 
Hazard Communication Standards (29 CFR 1910.1200) 
and Laboratory Standards (29 CFR 1910.1450) require that 
workers be provided with information about the known 
health hazards of their jobs.  Since so little information is 
available regarding immunotoxic effects, however, the 
Standards do little at present to protect workers from 
potential allergens. 



Only a few potential sensitizers are presently regulated by 
OSHA:

*  Cobalt metal, dust, and fume (Respiratory System)
*  Formaldehyde (Skin and Respiratory System) (29 CFR 
1910.1048)
*  Isophorone Diisocyanate (Skin and Respiratory 
System)
*  Phenyl Glycidyl Ether (Skin)
*  Picric Acid (Skin)
*  Toluene-2,4-Diisocyanate (Respiratory System)

Most scientists agree that the lack of human test data 
should not stop efforts to control human exposures to 
suspected sensitizers, but the absence of data ensures 
continued disagreement about suitable means and levels of 
control.  In regulating exposure to potential allergens, the 
nature of the dose is significant:  to prevent adverse health 
effects, should the exposure be considered over an 8-hour 
work shift, as one larger dose, or as an intermittent high 
dose?  Some information indicates that perhaps high 
intermittent doses can result in sensitization or can affect 
individuals who are sensitive.  There is evidence to indicate 
even a one-time exposure can produce sensitization.  A 
problem with setting exposure limits for a immune system-
related response is the challenge of developing an 
acceptable exposure limit for an event that does not appear 
to fit the standard dose-response relationship.

Accommodating the Allergic Employee

Once an employer learns that an applicant or employee is 
allergic to a substance in the workplace, and in need of an 
accommodation, the employer may be required by the 
Americans with Disabilities Act to provide the needed 
accommodation.  The allergic worker may be able to 
respond to low levels of exposure, levels that may be lower 
than the relevant occupational exposure limits set by OSHA 
or recommended by agencies such as NIOSH or 
organizations such as The American Conference of 
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH).  
Accommodating the allergic employee would therefore 
generally involve reducing exposure by providing specific 
protection for the sensitive individual, such as additional 
protective equipment the average (non-allergic) worker 
probably would not need.  Protective equipment could 
involve the use of respirators for respiratory protection or 
protective clothing (such as gloves) or barrier creams for 
skin protection.  The use of respirators would involve 
employer compliance with OSHA's Respiratory Protection 
Standard (29 CFR 1910.134), including determining 
whether a worker could wear a respirator. 

Battery-powered respirators may enable those with 
pulmonary or cardiovascular problems to still use a 
respirator.  Respirators made of silicone may enable 
someone to wear a respirator who has a rubber allergy.

Exposure could be reduced by the use of engineering 
controls such as better or more efficient use of ventilation 
to dilute or remove exposure; improved equipment design 
to reduce the production of vapors, mists, and splashes; or 
enclosures of equipment or processes to contain or collect 
any emissions.  Air cleaning equipment could be used to 
reduce the air concentration of a potential allergen in the 
work area of a sensitive individual.  Exposure may be 
reduced by scheduling changes that do not place the 
sensitive worker in a work area at the same time that a 
potential allergen is being used.  (For example, avoiding the 
use of products such as cleaning chemicals or pesticides 
or paints in the sensitive person's office or work area.)

Accommodation includes having personnel aware of what 
to do or who to call (such as emergency telephone 
numbers) if the allergic person experiences an adverse 
reaction such as an asthmatic attack or anaphylactic 
shock.  The allergic person's physician should be consulted 
as to what such measures should include (such as having 
antihistamines or bronchodilators available for emergency 
use).

There are, however, some other alternatives to consider 
that could reduce or altogether remove the potential for 
exposure to an allergen, including product or process 
substitution.  Product substitution involves the use of an 
alternative formulation for the chemical or material being 
used and eliminates containing or using the potential 
allergen.  For example, to avoid asthma from inhalation of 
persulfate boosters in hair bleaches, a hairdresser could use 
a bleach with a non-persulfate booster such as sodium 
perborate, sodium percarbonate, or magnesium carbonate. 
 Process substitution reduces or eliminates exposure to an 
allergen by the use of an alternative method for doing a job. 
 (For example, to avoid skin or respiratory allergies from 
the use of cold sterilization with formaldehyde solutions, 
sterilization using steam or ultraviolet light could be 
considered.  

Both product and process substitution may be well worth 
investigating, because they may have advantages to the 
employer in the areas of cost savings on hazardous waste 
disposal, less potential liability for handling or storage of 
hazardous materials, reduced need for extra or special 
ventilation or protective materials, reduced need for extra 
or special ventilation or protective equipment/clothing, 
reduced needs for fire or other types of insurance, reduced 
workers' compensation costs for injuries or illnesses, etc.  
Moreover, substitutions may have the added advantage of 
reducing exposure for other workers who have not yet 
shown any adverse health effects.

For some chemical exposures, it may be possible to have 
medical testing to determine if an individual is likely to have 
an allergic reaction to an exposure or to diagnose hyper-
reactive respiratory airways.  To assure compliance with 
the ADA and to protect the individual's privacy, it is 
important that such testing be performed only after the 
employer has made a job offer and that it be performed by 
a physician who reports to the employer only the 
information as to whether the employee can perform the 
requirements of the job and what accommodations might 
be necessary to enable him/her to do so.

Resources

For information on the Americans with Disabilities Act and 
accommodations the following can be contacted:

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline,  (800)
949-4232 (voice/TTY).

Job Accommodation Network, 
918 Chestnut Ridge Road, Suite 1, Morgantown, WV 
26506-6080, 
(800) ADA-WORK (voice/TDD).

American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists (ACGIH)
1330 Kemper Meadow Drive
Cincinnati, Ohio 45240, USA
Customers/Members Phone: 513-742-2020
Administrative Phone: 513-742-6163
Fax: 513-742-3355
E-mail: mail@acgih.org
http://www.acgih.org/

Workplace Health and Safety  Program, Cornell 
University, School of Industrial and Labor Relations, 
237 Main St. - Suite 1200, Buffalo, NY 14203 (716) 852-
4191

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 
1801 L Street, NW, Washington, DC 20507, (800) 669-
4000 (voice), (800) 800-3302 (TDD), or (800) 666-EEOC 
(publications).

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  This publication was written in 1994 and 
updated in February 2002 by Nellie J. Brown, M.S., CIH, 
Statewide Director, Workplace Health and Safety Program, 
New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations, 
Cornell University, 237 Main St. - Suite 1200 Buffalo, New 
York 14203, (716) 852-4191.  

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org



Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment 
and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-
Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant 
from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for 
accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of 
the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  
The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in 
its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification 
of various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  
Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing 
and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  
http://www.eeoc.gov 

Accommodating the Allergic Employee in the Workplace


February, 2002	CORNELL UNIVERSITY
