Employment 
Considerations for 
People who have 
Diabetes


What is Diabetes? 

Diabetes is a disease in which the body does not produce 
or properly use insulin. Insulin is a hormone that is needed 
to convert sugar, starches and other food into energy 
needed for daily life. There are 16 million people in the 
United States with diabetes.

There are two major types of diabetes: 

Type 1 (formerly known as "juvenile diabetes" or "insulin-
dependent diabetes") - A disease in which the body does 
not produce any insulin, most often first diagnosed in 
children and young adults. People with type 1 diabetes 
must take daily insulin injections or use an insulin pump to 
stay alive. Type 1 diabetes accounts for 5 to 10 percent of 
diabetes. 

Type 2 (formerly known as "adult onset diabetes") - A 
metabolic disorder resulting from the body's inability to 
make enough, or properly use, insulin. It is the most 
common form of the disease.  Type 2 diabetes accounts 
for 90 to 95 percent of diabetes.  People with type 2 
diabetes seek to manage the disease through weight 
control, appropriate diet, exercise, oral medication, and/or 
insulin depending upon the course of the disease in that 
person.  About half of the people with diagnosed type 2 
diabetes take insulin.

Diabetes causes blood glucose (sugar) levels to be too 
high.  This is known as hyperglycemia.  In the short term, 
high blood glucose levels can cause hunger, thirst, 
headache, blurry vision, frequent urination, itchy and dry 
skin, and - the most serious possible short term 
consequence - diabetic ketoacidosis, which can cause 
breathing difficulties, coma, and even death.

In the long term, high blood glucose levels can cause a 
number of serious complications such as eye disease 
(including blindness), kidney disease (including kidney 
failure), nerve damage, blood vessel disease (including 
heart attack, stroke and leg/foot amputations), and 
susceptibility to dangerous infections.  

Insulin and oral medications do not cure diabetes.  
Moreover, insulin and some oral medications can cause 
blood glucose levels to go too low.  This is known as 
hypoglycemia and can result in tremors, palpitations and 
sweating, confusion, drowsiness, mood changes, 
unresponsiveness, unconsciousness, convulsions, and 
death. 

This does not mean that most people with diabetes, or even 
insulin-treated diabetes, will experience the most extreme 
symptoms of high and low blood sugar levels.  It does 
mean that people with diabetes must use vigilance in order 
to keep their blood sugar levels as close to normal as 
possible in order to avoid a broad range of immediate and 
long-term medical problems.

As many as five million of the sixteen million Americans 
with diabetes do not know they have the condition.  This is 
dangerous since such people are subject to the short and 
long term consequences of high blood glucose levels. 
Employers may offer diabetes detection and education 
programs. This can alert employees to the symptoms of 
diabetes and encourage them to be tested so they can 
obtain appropriate treatment. 

Diabetes cannot be cured, but through diabetes self-
management, people with diabetes adjust food, insulin 
and/or oral medication, and exercise in order to keep blood 
glucose levels within a prescribed range.    The person 
with diabetes needs to take responsibility for maintaining a 
good diet, exercising, and seeking appropriate medical 
care.  Those who take good care of themselves can be as 
productive or even more productive than other employees 
simply because they are knowledgeable about and 
participate in a healthy life-style.

Diabetes and the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) 
The ADA defines a person with a disability in three ways: 
1.	An individual who has a physical or mental impairment 
that substantially limits one or more major life 
activities;
2.	Someone who has a record of such an impairment; or
3.	Someone who is regarded as having such an 
impairment.

Diabetes is not well known or understood by many 
employers.  The vast majority of people with diabetes live 
and work successfully without negative impact on their 
work.  Because their condition does not impact their ability 
to do their job, they may choose to not make their 
employer aware of their condition.  Fear of discrimination 
keeps many employees with diabetes quiet. 

 In what areas might employers discriminate?

As with any disability, the potential to discriminate exists at 
any point in the employment process.  

Examples:

?	A nurse sent her resume to 16 institutions and in her 
cover letter mentioned her diabetes.  She had only two 
responses, and no job offer.
?	A man with diabetes initially hired to run a shipboard 
boutique was rejected by the company doctor because 
a passenger with diabetes slipped into a coma 20 years 
ago and died, setting a precedent.
?	An airline employee was forced to take one twenty-
minute break rather than the two 10- minute breaks 
she needed to test her blood sugar, take insulin, and/or 
eat.  
?	A cashier with diabetic neuropathy was unable to do 
his job because the employer would not allow him to 
sit down between customers. 
?	A person with diabetes was rejected for the position of 
police officer because the municipal police department 
had a blanket policy that disqualified anyone who uses 
insulin - even though the applicant had successfully 
held a law enforcement position in another county for 
a number of years.

These situations reflect the fear and misunderstanding 
surrounding this condition. As with any other disability, 
employers are required by ADA to look at the actual 
limitations, not perceived limitations.

Workplace Implications of Diabetes 
Despite good monitoring of diet, medication, and exercise, 
some people with diabetes may experience hypoglycemia 
or hyperglycemia.  However, most  people with diabetes 
recognize the warning signals of these conditions and 
immediately take appropriate action to bring their blood 
glucose level back to a safe range.  

It is important that employers make the reasonable 
accommodations that allow people with diabetes to check 
their blood glucose level by self-administering a finger stick 
test (which takes less than a minute) and then 
administering medication (for high glucose levels) or a 
source of sugar (for low glucose levels). It only takes a 
few minutes for the person's blood sugar to return to 
normal.

The risk of hypoglycemia generally does not create a 
danger in the workplace.  Thus, for example, there is no 
reason to disqualify a person for a desk job simply because 
s/he experiences even extreme hypoglycemia.

Even in those jobs where severe hypoglycemia could 
create a danger (for example, law enforcement positions) 
there is no reason to disqualify a person simply because he 
or she has diabetes or uses insulin.  Rather, both the 
current state of diabetes management and judicial 
interpretations of the ADA have stressed that each person 
should be evaluated individually.  The American Diabetes 
Association states, "Diabetes as such should not be a cause 
for discriminating against any person in employment.  
People with diabetes should be individually considered for 
employment, weighing such factors as the requirements or 
hazards of the specific job, the individual's medical 
condition, and their treatment regimen (diet, oral 
hypoglycemic agents, and insulin).  Any person with 
diabetes, whether insulin-dependent or non-insulin-
dependent, should be eligible for any employment for 
which he or she is otherwise qualified."

What Types of Jobs Do People with Diabetes Do? 
There are very few restrictions for people with diabetes.  
Employers should not assume that diabetes will increase 
safety concerns, and they must demonstrate that any 
medical examination or screening is job related and 
consistent with business necessity.  In addition, individuals 
should be assessed for their present ability to safely 
perform the essential functions of the job, not based upon 
the possibility of future complications.

Problems may occur with those who cannot avoid severe 
hypoglycemia, and consequently they should not work in 
dangerous areas.  However, since this is quite uncommon, 
the employee, based on his or her experiences, should 
generally make this decision, not the employer, unless the 
employer can show that a hypoglycemic employee 
presents a direct threat to workplace health or safety.  
Diabetes is a highly individualized condition.  Ideally the 
employee, his or her doctor, and the employer, will work 
together to ensure success.

Reasonably Accommodating a Person who has 
Diabetes
For the most part, people with diabetes should need no 
special treatment from their supervisors.  An understanding 
of the condition and the possible need for regular work 
schedules and meal breaks is usually helpful and 
appreciated.  Living successfully with diabetes means that 
a person must be self-disciplined, self-aware, and self-
responsible, all valued characteristics in many jobs.  

The Americans with Disabilities Act requires employers to 
"reasonably accommodate" the limitations imposed by a 
person's physical or mental disability.  Reasonable 
accommodation is defined as modification or adjustment of 
a job, employment practice, or the work environment that 
makes it possible for a qualified person with a disability to 
be employed.  The law states that the employer needs to 
accommodate from the first contact with the person with 
the disability, during the application process, on the job, in 
training, on the work site, and when considering 
promotions and layoffs.  If job duties change, new 
accommodations may need to be made.  

The ADA requires an employer to accommodate unless 
doing so would cause the employer an undue hardship.  If 
an employers finds that the cost of an accommodation 
would impose an undue hardship, and no funding is 
available from another source, an applicant or employee 
with a disability should be offered the option of paying for 
the portion of the cost that constitutes an undue hardship, 
or of providing the accommodation.

If we think of accommodations as "productivity 
enhancements" similar to others made in the workplace, 
they become part of the cost of doing business. 

The ADA requires that employers only accommodate 
known disabilities.  The most common accommodation 
that a person with diabetes needs is easy and virtually cost-
free: the time and space to check blood glucose levels and 
to self-administer medication or food.  Schedules should be 
arranged to accommodate this.  A private place to test 
should be available if the employee desires it, as well.  The 
employee may also need to test on an as-needed basis, 
when he or she can tell blood glucose levels are starting to 
rise or fall.

Some people with diabetes do experience complications 
such as vision loss, nerve damage, or amputation that may 
require additional accommodations.  

If the diabetes has resulted in visual loss, accommodations 
can be made.  Low vision aids may prove useful.  The 
employee's eye care professional may suggest 
magnification, appropriate lighting, or large print materials. 
 The employee may want to contact a local resource center 
for people who are blind or visually impaired for a low 
vision assessment on the job to find useful aids.

Other people may develop complications such as 
neuropathy or amputation that make walking difficult.  
These conditions can often be accommodated by such 
easy actions as allowing an employees to sit while working 
or to limit walking by having a close parking spot or 
permitting shortcuts through the facility.

In some cases of diabetes, despite ones best efforts at 
maintaining good blood sugar control, the individual will 
experience the complications of diabetes including loss of 
vision, neuropathy, amputations, heart disease, and kidney 
disease.  These complications may have a great enough 
impact that the person will need to learn alternative ways 
of performing activities.  The employee may need to take a 
leave of absence to attend a formal program of vocational 
rehabilitation, where he or she will learn new ways to 
perform job duties.  Vocational rehabilitation training will 
teach the person how to get around safely (perhaps with a 
white cane), use adaptive equipment, and perhaps to 
perform job tasks in a somewhat different manner. 

Training and Promotion 
For most people with diabetes, the employer should have 
no concerns about training and promotion. If the 
employee's diabetes has caused significant functional 
limitations, and if training activities are planned, consult the 
employee about possible accommodations needed in the 
training environment.  

These may include: 
?	regular testing of blood glucose levels and meal breaks, 
just as during the normal work day
?	training materials put into alternative formats  such as 
large print 
?	having another trainee copy his or her notes if training 
is conducted in a darkened room 

Employers should assume that people with diabetes have 
the same career goals and aspirations as any other 
employee.  A person's diabetes should play no part in 
decisions about transfers and promotions.  Concentrate 
only on the appropriateness of the person's skills for a new 
position and determine if reasonable accommodations are 
needed.  Capitalize on the person's strengths and 
accommodate limitations to gain greatest productivity from 
the employee.

Resources 
ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline 
(800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY).

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 1801 L 
Street, NW, Washington, DC  20507, (800) 669-4000 
(voice), (800) 800-3302 (TTY), (800) 666-EEOC 
(publications).  For on-line information, go to 
www.eeoc.gov.

American Diabetes Association
1701 North Beauregard Street, Alexandria, VA 22311, 
 1-800-DIABETES (342-2383)

If visual functioning is affected by diabetes, the employee 
or employer may wish to contact the local office of the 
state Commission (or Services) for the Blind and 
Visually Impaired.  Look in your telephone directory 
under state services. 


Amicus American Diabetes Association (ADA) is the 
nation's leading nonprofit health organization providing 
diabetes research, information and advocacy. The 
mission of the organization is to prevent and cure 
diabetes, and to improve the lives of all people affected 
by diabetes.  As part of its mission, ADA advocates for 
the rights of people with diabetes and supports strong 
public policies and laws to protect persons with 
diabetes against discrimination.  ADA has over 
400,000 general members and over 17,000 
professional members.

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It has been revised and updated in 2001  by 
Shereen Arent, National Director of Legal Advocacy, 
American Diabetes Association from the original, which was 
written in 1993 by Mary B. Dickson. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center.  Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment 
and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-
Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant 
from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for 
accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of 
the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  
The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in 
its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification 
of various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  
Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing 
and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  
http://www.eeoc.gov 
Employment Considerations for People who have Diabetes


July, 2001	CORNELL UNIVERSITY
