Working Effectively with Employees who Have Epilepsy

What is Epilepsy?

The word "epilepsy" derives from the Greek word "to be seized."  It is a generic 
term that refers to a wide variety of seizure conditions.  There are very well 
known individuals in history such as Julius Caesar, Socrates, Vincent van Gogh, 
Dostoyevsky, and others who had active seizure conditions, as do a number of 
present day celebrities, sports figures, and political figures (e.g., Margaux 
Hemingway, Buddy Bell, Tony Coelho).  These individuals were or are quite 
obviously very productive persons contributing significantly to society.

A seizure involves a disruption of the normal activity of the brain through 
neuronal instability.  Neurons become unstable and fire in an abnormally rapid 
manner, similar to a misfiring engine, with the excess electric discharges 
resulting in a seizure.  The seizure may be confined to one area of the brain 
(partial seizure) or take place throughout the entire brain (generalized 
seizure).  The most common generalized seizure, formerly known as a "grand mal" 
seizure (now known as a tonic-clonic seizure), is often easier to control than a 
partial seizure.  A majority of the individuals coming to specialized epilepsy 
centers for treatment have partial seizures, which can be more difficult to 
control, but  usually are functionally safer.  The causes of epilepsy are wide 
ranging and include infectious diseases in a pregnant mother, parasitic 
infections, vascular diseases, birth trauma, etc.  Only 1 - 2 % of conditions 
can be traced to genetic causes.  It must be remembered that epilepsy involves 
recurring or more than one seizure -- for various medical reasons, any number of 
individuals may experience a single seizure.

Establishing a seizure diagnosis involves the taking of a medical history and an 
evaluation by a neurologist, and generally, an awake and/or sleep 
electroencephalograph (EEG) assessment.  It is important to note that precise 
seizure diagnosis can involve not only both types of EEGs, but also magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), computerized tomography (CT) scanning, or even 24 hour 
EEG video monitoring.  The MRI can now be the first step in diagnostic sequence, 
preceding EEG.  

Many individuals with the correct diagnosis and medication can have their 
epilepsy easily managed.  The vast majority of individuals with epilepsy can 
have complete freedom from seizures, or good seizure control.  Individuals with 
recurring seizures should always be referred to a neurologist.  If a neurologist 
cannot achieve seizure control with an individual over a nine-month period, 
referral to a specialized epilepsy center should be made.  During the 1990s, a 
number of new medications, including Gabepentin, Lamotrogine, and Topiramate, 
have been developed.  Some of these newer medications can be used individually 
or as "add on" drugs, usually without negative side effects.  A number of 
individuals in our society with continuing seizures are often not adequately 
treated. In addition to anticonvulsant medications, some individuals can benefit 
dramatically from use of a vagal nerve stimulator (VNS), which is an implant 
that can help people for whom medications have not been effective.  Some people 
are also candidates for epilepsy surgery, which can provide seizure freedom or 
improved control.

First Aid for Seizures

Since the majority of individuals with epilepsy have partial seizures which 
typically involve a short period of disorientation (e.g., 30 seconds) or brief 
cessation of activity; first aid concerns are minimal.  These individuals simply 
need to be watched during the period of seizure, or gently guided (not 
restrained) to a chair with reassuring statements.  For individuals who have a 
generalized tonic-clonic or grand mal seizure involving loss of consciousness, a 
period of rigidity, and convulsions, the most important first aid concern is 
that the seizure be timed.  Emergency medical aid is not required unless the 
seizure length approaches five minutes.  Most of these seizures last slightly 
over a minute.  Most persons will require some time in order to orient and 
compose themselves post-seizure.  When possible, they should be turned on their 
sides for comfort and any harmful items moved out of the way.  It is often 
dangerous to individuals with seizures to try to place something in their mouths 
during a seizure (e.g., to prevent biting their mouths) and simply not 
necessary.

Is Epilepsy Really a Concern at the Work Place For Those With an Active 
Condition?

For those with active epilepsy, seizure conditions can vary widely and need to 
be considered on an individual basis.  Many individuals experiencing seizures 
will present absolutely no job-relevant concerns.  These are individuals who 
have seizures only nocturnally, have a consistent warning aura and can seat 
themselves or take other safety precautions, or have a partial seizure in which, 
for example, they do not lose consciousness and have only a limb tremor.

Many individuals with epilepsy will simply not discuss their condition because 
of their freedom from seizures, a high level of seizure control, or the fact 
that it doesn't impact performance of the essential functions of the job (e.g., 
a person with nocturnal seizures only).  Some individuals with epilepsy will 
prefer to discuss their disability at the end of the interview as a matter of 
personal comfort or courtesy to the employer even if it is not required.  
However, they may need to discuss their condition if drug testing is a standard 
part of the employment screening process once a job offer is extended.  The 
presence of anticonvulsant drugs can be misinterpreted during drug testing. 

Implications of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) for Individuals with 
Epilepsy

The ADA defines disability as a physical or mental impairment that substantially 
limits a major life activity.  The ADA defines physical impairment as including 
a physiological disorder or condition.  Epilepsy is an example of a 
physiological disorder affecting the neurological system.  Persons with seizure 
disorders therefore have a physical impairment.

In determining whether an impairment rises to the level of a disability under 
the ADA, mitigating measures, such as medications, must be considered.  Thus, if 
an individual's epilepsy is completely or substantially controlled with 
medication, s/he might not be considered to have an ADA disability because the 
condition might not substantially limit a major life activity when successfully 
controlled with medication.

A General Perspective on Employer Concerns in the Work Place for Employees with 
Epilepsy

Employers sometimes have a number of unfounded concerns about the work 
performance of individuals with epilepsy; some of the information below may be 
helpful:

* Attendance and performance - Most studies suggest attendance and performance 
records for those with epilepsy are equal to or better than the general working 
population (McLellan, 1987).
* Accident rates - Risch (1968) demonstrated that actual time lost due to 
seizures was approximately one hour for every thousand hours worked for 
individuals with active seizure conditions.  Sands (1961) reviewed workers' 
compensation cases over a 13-year period in the state of New York and 
established that accidents caused by sneezing or coughing on the job were twice 
as frequent than those related to seizure occurrences.  Quattrini et al. (1999) 
indicate no change in job accident rate after the onset of epilepsy for 860 
workers.
* Working around machinery - In consideration of today's safety standards, it is 
rare that machinery would require any special modification for individuals with 
a seizure condition.  Plastic guards, cut-off mechanisms on machinery, and other 
safety modifications, are becoming standard.
* Insurance rates - Hiring individuals with epilepsy does not increase a 
company's industrial insurance rates.  These rates are linked to the hazards of 
specific occupational classifications. EPI-HAB, a sheltered work system for 
those seizure disorders, reported receiving significant insurance premium 
reductions due to outstanding safety records.  Health insurance providers 
generally link rates to age and sex in larger companies, while among smaller 
companies, the providers usually pool claim experiences and no one employer is 
penalized. 
* People with epilepsy generally refrain from drinking alcohol or engaging in 
recreational drug activity, and otherwise lead a relatively healthy lifestyle in 
order not to aggravate their condition.  Consequently, they are often safer on 
the job than the average employee and are highly stable employees.
Accommodation Issues for the Individual with Epilepsy

During the application and interview process, reasonable accommodations are 
generally not necessary for an individual with epilepsy.  In the interview, 
however, some individuals may indicate that they need a specific type of 
accommodation in order to perform the essential functions of a job or to perform 
those functions more safely.  

As an employer, you should identify the essential functions of a job that an 
individual is required to do at your work place with or without reasonable 
accommodation. 

Although a number of companies routinely require a driver's license, this 
requirement is often not linked to an essential function of a job.  A company 
may need to examine whether the capacity for driving is actually an essential 
job function and, if not, whether a job could be slightly modified or 
restructured so that a minimal amount of driving is performed by another worker 
or shared by other workers.  Many individuals with epilepsy, however, are very 
capable of driving due to their level of seizure control, type of seizure 
warning, and other considerations.  To drive, people with this disability are 
generally required to have a seizure free period of three months to a year.  In 
some states, this is at the discretion of the individual's physician and his or 
her assessment of an individual's seizure condition.  In sum, driving can be an 
essential job function for some positions, such as a traveling sales 
representative or courier, but in any number of other cases driving is often a 
marginal and non-essential job function.

In addition to restructuring job tasks, other examples of accommodation for 
individuals with epilepsy would include:

* Installing a safety guard on a piece of machinery.
* Installing some industrial rubber matting or carpeting in order to cover a 
concrete floor in a work area.
* Scheduling consistent day work shifts for individuals whose seizures are 
exacerbated by inconsistent sleep patterns caused by rotating shifts and, in 
some cases, night shifts.
* Allowing individuals to have an extended break or some time off after they 
have experienced a seizure while on the job.
* Providing flame-retardant clothing for individuals working in an area in which 
a burn could be incurred during a seizure event and period of disorientation.
* Provision of some type of safety helmet while on the job.
When they are needed, accommodations for individuals with epilepsy generally are 
not costly. The Job Accommodation Network (JAN), a service of the U.S. 
Department of Labor, Office of Disability Employment policy, and headquartered 
at West Virginia University, indicates that 80% of the accommodations made 
result in a cost of no more than $500 to an employer with about 20% involving no 
cost whatsoever.(*1)  Accommodations for individuals with epilepsy frequently 
involve a type of procedural consideration rather than physical changes to the 
worksite or  purchase of equipment.  This generally does not require any 
significant cost, nor is it likely to impose an undue hardship to the employer.  
Employees with epilepsy, particularly with a reasonable accommodation in place, 
will rarely pose a direct threat of harm in the workplace. 

Selecting an Accommodation

The selection of a reasonable accommodation can often be accomplished through 
direct dialogue between the employee and the employer.  Accommodations can 
involve procedural changes, which change how the job is done but do not involve 
assistive equipment or physical modifications to the worksite.  They can also 
involve physical modifications or safeguards to a workstation, or low tech or 
high tech assistive equipment.  Again, most of the considerations for those with 
epilepsy will involve a procedural change or perhaps some safeguarding of a 
workstation.

If the employer and employee cannot agree on an effective reasonable 
accommodation, a state vocational rehabilitation agency, a local Epilepsy 
Foundation affiliate, the national Epilepsy Foundation, or resources such as the 
Job Accommodation Network (JAN) can be contacted for assistance.  State 
vocational rehabilitation agencies will often send a vocational rehabilitation 
counselor or assistive technologist to the job site in order to help with 
reasonable accommodation needs.  Again, it must be underscored that 
accommodation concerns for employees with epilepsy, when necessary, are 
generally very low cost.  Individual companies may also be eligible to receive 
tax credits or deductions for physical modification or equipment purchase 
efforts at the work site if this cost is not borne by a local or state 
vocational rehabilitation agency.

References

Devinsky, Orrin.  A Guide to Understanding and Living With Epilepsy.  
Philadelphia:  FA Davis, 1994.

Epilepsy Foundation of America.  Americans with Disabilities Act:  A Guide to 
Provisions Affecting Persons with Seizure Disorders.  Washington, DC:  author, 
1992.

Fraser, RT, Glaser, E., Simcoe, B.  Epilepsy.  In Brodwin, M, Tellez, F, and 
Brodwin, SK (editors), Medical, Psychosocial, and Vocational Aspects of 
Epilepsy.  Athens, GA:  Elliott & Fitzpatrick, 2001.

McLellan, DL.  Epilepsy and employment.  Journal of Social and Occupational 
Medicine, 1987, 3:94-99.

Pfafflin, M, Specht, U, Thorbecke, R, Fraser, RT, Wolf, P., editors.  
Comprehensive Care for People With Epilepsy.  London:  J. Libbey, 2001.

Quattrini, A, et al.  Working activities and entailing risks in a large 
population of epileptic subjects.  Epilepsia, 1999, 40 (Sp 2):199.

Risch, F.  We lost every game...but.  Rehabilitation Record, 1968, 9:16-18.

Sands, H.  Report of a study undertaken for the committee on neurological 
disorders in industry.  Epilepsy News, 1961 7(Abstract), 1.

Resources

The Epilepsy Foundation of America
4351 Garden City Dr
Landover, MD  20785
1-800-EFA-1000
http://www.epilepsyfoundation.org
The Epilepsy Foundation provides a wealth of information on employment concerns 
for those with epilepsy.  The 800 number or web site offers an ADA informational 
monograph and brochure, tips for employment interviewing and disclosure issues, 
information about local area employment programs or local epilepsy affiliates 
with employment programs, legal advocacy and job discrimination issues.

Your Local Epilepsy Foundation Affiliate
In order to identify an Epilepsy Foundation affiliate nearest to you, contact 
the national office at 1 800 EFA-1000 or through the web site.  Information can 
also be provided regarding any available employment program at the local 
affiliate office.

Job Accommodation Network (JAN)
West Virginia University
PO Box 6080
Morgantown, WV  26506-6080
1 800 526-7234
http://www.jan.wvu.edu
This is a one stop shopping resource on accommodation issues for those with 
disabilities.  The database provides specific examples of employees with 
specific disabilities for whom job station accommodations were made.  Contact 
information for company personnel involved in the accommodation and manufacturer 
information for the specific equipment used is available.  It is an excellent 
resource for both employees and employers on effective reasonable accommodation 
approaches.

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center Hotline
1 800 949-4232

State Vocational Rehabilitation office
Every state has a vocational rehabilitation agency that provides vocational 
assessment, counseling, job training and placement, advocacy, and often a 
variety of support or medical services critical to a person's employability.  
Look for the Office of Vocational Rehabilitation Services under state listings 
in your telephone directory.


This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices and workplace 
accommodations for persons with disabilities edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, 
Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, Program on Employment and Disability, School of 
Industrial and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University.  It was 
written in January, 2001 by Robert F. Fraser, Ph.D., C.R.C., Professor/Director, 
University of Washington Department of Neurology Vocational Services.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. Department of 
Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research as a 
National Materials Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of new 
brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on Employment and Disability, 
and the Pacific Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center.

Cornell University currently serves as Northeast Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also conducting employment policy and 
practices research, examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been funded by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research  (Grant #H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on Employment of 
Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be found at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports relating to employment practices 
and policies on disability civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/

For further information, contact the Program on Employment and Disability, 
Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 
(Voice), 607/255-2891 (TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical Assistance Program 
and Regional Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-
4232 (voice/TTY), www.adata.org

Disclaimer

This material was produced by the program on Employment and Disability, School 
of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension Division, Cornell University, and 
funded by a grant from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
and Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those 
of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's 
interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 
1630), Technical Assistance Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement 
Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide information, materials, and technical 
assistance to individuals and entities that are covered by the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, and/or 
technical assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, and are neither a 
determination of your legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor 
binding on any agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued enforcement guidance 
which provides additional clarification of various elements of the Title I 
provisions under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance documents are available for 
viewing and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 




1 Job Accommodation Network. Accommodation Benefit/Cost Data: Tabulated through 
July 1999. http://www.jan.wvu.edu/media/Stats/BenCosts0799.html.  Retrieved 
4/25/01.


Working Effectively with Employees who Have Epilepsy
Cornell University	January 2001

