
Employee Medical Exams and Disability-Related Inquiries under the ADA: 
Guidance for Employers Regarding Current Employees


Overview 

When does the ADA impact an employer's ability to 
require medical exams or make disability-related 
inquiries?

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (the "ADA") 
applies to all employers with 15 or more employees.  The 
ADA divides the employment relationship into three distinct 
phases: pre-offer, post-offer and during employment, and 
sets forth what an employer can do at each of these stages. 
The focus of this brochure is on what the employer can do 
during the employment phase;, that is, after an employee is 
on board and working.

Can an employer require an employee to have a medical 
exam or make disability-related inquiries? 

An employer may require a medical exam or make a 
disability-related inquiry of an employee as long as the 
inquiry or exam is job-related and consistent with business 
necessity.  Any medical information obtained from a 
disability-related inquiry or exam, as well as any medical 
information voluntarily disclosed by an employee, must be 
treated as a confidential medical record.

Do the ADA's provisions on medical exams and 
disability-related inquiries apply to all employees?

Yes.  The ADA's restrictions on inquiries and exams apply 
to all employees of covered employers, not just those with 
disabilities.  While other ADA protections are limited to those 
individuals who can show they are qualified individuals with 
disabilities, the language of the ADA is clear that employers 
are not permitted to ask questions or conduct medical 
examinations of any employee unless there is a legitimate 
purpose for doing so.  Based on this language, the U.S. 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) has 
taken the position that any employee has the right to 
challenge a disability-related inquiry or medical exam that is 
not job-related and consistent with business necessity.  

What about temporary employees?

As a general rule, an individual is an employee if an entity 
controls the means and manner of his/her work 
performance.  Oftentimes, a temporary employee is both an 
employee of the employment agency and the employer to 
which s/he is assigned.  As employers, the employment 
agency and the temporary employer could ask disability-
related questions and require medical examinations only if 
they are job-related and consistent with business necessity.
Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical Exams

What exactly is a disability-related inquiry?

A disability-related inquiry is a question (or series of 
questions) that is likely to elicit information about disability.  
This would include direct questions about disability, such as 
whether a person has or has ever had a disability, how they 
became disabled, or details about the nature or severity of 
their disability.  In addition, questions about genetic 
information, prior workers' compensation history, past or 
current prescription medications, or a broad inquiry about 
medical impairments (e.g., "tell me about every medical 
problem you have"), would also be restricted because they 
are likely to yield information about disability.  Restrictions 
on this type of inquiry apply both to questions asked of the 
person and questions asked of any other third party, such as 
a co-worker or doctor.  Note that questions about illegal 
drug use or whether someone has been drinking are not 
disability-related inquiries.

 Does this mean I shouldn't even ask "How are you?"

Asking generally about an employee's well being is 
permitted.  For example, it is perfectly fine to ask an 
employee who looks tired or ill whether s/he is feeling okay 
or to ask how an employee is doing following a divorce or 
loss of a loved one.   Likewise, it is permissible to ask about 
nondisability-related impairments (e.g., "how did you break 
your wrist?"), or to inquire how a pregnant employee is 
feeling or when her baby is due.  It is also okay to simply 
ask a person if s/he can do the job.  Moreover, if the 
employee raises disability-related issues, it would be 
acceptable for the employer to discuss the matter with 
him/her. 

When you say "medical exam," does this mean a head-
to-toes check-up by the doctor?

A medical exam would include a complete physical; but the 
term, as used in the ADA, also includes a number of other 
more limited exams or procedures.  In general, a medical 
exam is a procedure or test that seeks information about an 
individual's physical or mental health.  Various factors can 
make a test medical, including: whether a medical 
professional conducts or interprets the test, whether the test 
is designed to reveal an impairment or physical or mental 
health generally, whether the test measures the ability to 
perform a task versus physiological response to performing 
the task; or whether the test is invasive, uses medical 
equipment, or is conducted in a medical setting.  Sometimes 
one of these factors is enough to make a procedure medical. 
 Sometimes a combination of factors will be relevant.

In general, medical examinations would include the 
following:

?	full or partial (e.g., back only) physical exam by a 
doctor or other medical professional
?	vision tests conducted and analyzed by an 
ophthalmologist or an optometrist
?	blood, urine, and breath tests to check for alcohol use
?	blood, urine, saliva, and hair analyses to detect disease 
or genetic markers 
?	blood pressure and cholesterol screening
?	nerve conduction tests 
?	range of motion tests that measure muscle strength and 
function
?	pulmonary function tests 
?	psychological tests designed to measure a mental 
disorder or impairment
?	diagnostic procedures such as x-rays, CAT scans, and 
MRIs.

What are some common employment tests that are not 
considered medical exams?

There are a number of tests and procedures given by 
employers that are not considered medical, including:

?	tests to determine the illegal use of drugs
?	physical agility tests, which measure an employee's 
ability to perform actual or simulated job tasks
?	physical fitness tests, which measure an employee's 
performance of physical tasks, such as running or 
lifting, as long as these tests do not include a medical 
component such as measuring heart rate or blood 
pressure
?	tests that measure an ability to read labels or distinguish 
objects as part of a demonstration of the ability to do 
actual job functions
?	psychological tests that measure personality traits such 
as honesty, preferences, or habits
?	polygraph examinations

How should an employer treat an employee who applies 
for a new job within the company?

The EEOC has taken the position that an employer should 
treat an employee who applies for a new job just like an 
outside applicant for the job.  This means that the employer 
cannot ask disability-related questions or require a medical 
exam before making a conditional offer of the new position. 
 A current supervisor who has medical information about the 
employee should not disclose that information to the person 
conducting interviews for the new job or to the new 
supervisor.

Once a conditional offer is made, the employer may require a 
medical exam or ask disability-related questions as long as it 
does so for all entering employees in the same job category.  
If the job offer is subsequently withdrawn because of 
medical information, the employer must show that the 
reason for doing so was job-related and consistent with 
business necessity. 

An individual is not an applicant where s/he is 
noncompetitively entitled to another position with the same 
employer (e.g., because of seniority or satisfactory 
performance in his/her present position).  An individual who 
is temporarily assigned to another position and then returns 
to his/her regular job is also not an applicant.  Since these 
individuals are considered to be employees, the employer can 
only ask disability-related questions or require medical exams 
that are job-related and consistent with business necessity.  

Job-Related and Consistent with Business Necessity 

What does "job-related and consistent with business 
necessity" mean?  

The EEOC takes the position that a disability-related inquiry 
or medical exam of an employee may be "job-related and 
consistent with business necessity" when an employer has a 
reasonable belief, based on objective evidence, that: (1) an 
employee's ability to do essential job functions will be 
impaired by a medical condition; or (2) an employee will 
pose a direct threat due to a medical condition.  This 
standard may be met if an employer knows about a 
particular employee's medical condition, has observed 
performance problems, and can reasonably attribute the 
problems to the medical condition.  The standard may also 
be met when the employer has been given reliable 
information by a credible third party that the person has a 
medical condition or the employer has observed symptoms 
that indicate the person may have a medical condition that 
will impair the ability to do essential functions or will pose a 
direct threat. 

Example:  A fork lift driver's job is to transport and stack 
pallets weighing several hundred to a thousand pounds in a 
storage warehouse with numerous workers on the floor.  
After an impeccable ten year work record, the fork lift driver 
crashes into a wall of stacked pallets, narrowly missing a co-
worker.  The employee explains that he felt dizzy and 
became disoriented, and that this has happened a few other 
times, although never at work.  The employer believes that 
the employee may pose a direct threat and sends him for a 
medical examination to determine if he is fit to perform his 
job.  The employer provides the doctor with a description of 
the job to help ensure an accurate determination.  This 
examination would be considered job-related and consistent 
with business necessity.

Example: Several months ago, a supervisor overheard two 
employees talking about another co-worker, who had told 
them about having a serious heart condition that necessitates 
the use of medication and frequent doctor's visits.  The 
individual comes to work every day and successfully 
performs her duties as a computer programmer.  In this 
case, the employer does not have a reasonable belief that the 
computer programmer's ability to perform her essential job 
functions are impaired or that she poses a direct threat due 
to a medical condition.  The employer may not make 
disability-related inquiries or require a medical examination.

Are disability-related inquiries or medical exams 
following a request for reasonable accommodation job-
related and consistent with business necessity? 
 
When an employee requests reasonable accommodation and 
the disability or need for accommodation is not obvious, it is 
job-related and consistent with business necessity for the 
employer to ask an employee for reasonable documentation 
about his/her disability and its functional limitations that 
require reasonable accommodation.

An employer may require an employee to provide 
documentation that is sufficient to substantiate that s/he has 
an ADA disability and needs the reasonable accommodation 
requested.  Documentation is sufficient if it (1) describes the 
nature, severity, and duration of the employee's impairment, 
the activity or activities that the impairment limits, and the 
extent to which the impairment limits the employee's ability 
to perform the activity or activities; and (2) substantiates 
why the requested accommodation is needed to enable the 
employee to perform essential job functions. 

Note that an employer cannot ask for unrelated 
documentation.  The practical consequence of this is that an 
employer generally cannot ask for complete medical records 
because they would contain unrelated information.
 
Example:  A secretary with no known disability asks for an 
ergonomic chair because of back pain.  The employer may 
ask the employee to provide documentation from her treating 
physician that: (1) describes the nature, severity, and 
duration of the impairment, the activity or activities that the 
impairment limits, and the extent to which the impairment 
limits her ability to perform the activity or activities; and (2) 
substantiates why the ergonomic chair is needed.  If the 
employee fails to provide the documentation, the employer 
would not be required to provide the chair.

Practical Dos and Don'ts Regarding Disability-Related 
Inquiries and Medical Examinations

May an employer require an employee to go to a health 
care professional of the employer's (rather than the 
employee's) choice when the employee requests a 
reasonable accommodation?

The EEOC has taken the position that the ADA does not 
prevent an employer from requiring an employee to go to an 
appropriate health care professional of the employer's choice 
if the employee provides insufficient documentation from 
his/her treating physician (or other medical professional) to 
substantiate an ADA disability and the need for 
accommodation.   However, the employee should first be 
given the chance to provide the missing information.  

The EEOC's position, which limits when an employer may 
require an exam by the employer's doctor, could be subject 
to challenge.  While the employee has the initial burden of 
making a showing to support the request for reasonable 
accommodation, it could be argued that the employer has 
fairly broad rights to require a second opinion or seek further 
information whenever it believes additional inquiry is 
warranted.  However, consistent with its position, the EEOC 
has specifically noted that as long as the employer's request 
for additional information or another medical exam is based 
on a good faith belief that the information it has gotten so far 
is insufficient, such request would not be considered a form 
of retaliation and the employer would not be liable for 
violating the ADA.

The EEOC's recommendation that the employer should also 
consider getting the employee's permission to consult 
directly with the employee's doctor before requiring the 
employee to go to the employer's doctor is a good, cost 
effective approach.   As a practical matter, the employer 
may want to have its doctor consult directly with the 
employee's physician.  

Any medical examination conducted by the employer's 
health care professional must be job-related and consistent 
with business necessity.  Specifically it must be limited to 
determining the existence of an ADA disability and the 
functional limitations that require a reasonable 
accommodation. 

May an employer require that an employee, who it 
reasonably believes will pose a direct threat, be 
examined by an appropriate health care professional of 
the employer's choice?

Yes.  The EEOC has stated that an employer may have an 
employee, who it believes poses a direct threat, examined by 
a healthcare professional of its choosing who has expertise 
in the employee's specific condition and can provide medical 
information that allows the employer to determine the effects 
of the condition on the employee's ability to do his job.  The 
exam would be limited to determining whether the employee 
can perform his job without posing a direct threat, with or 
without reasonable accommodation.  In most circumstances, 
the employer could not request complete medical records 
because they would contain unrelated information. 

The employer should be very cautious about relying solely 
on its medical provider's conclusion if it conflicts with the 
opinion of the employee's treating physician.  In evaluating 
both opinions, the employer may find it helpful to consider: 
(1) the medical expertise of each health care professional; 
(2) what kind of information was provided to each medical 
professional regarding the job's essential functions and the 
work environment; (3) whether an opinion is based on 
speculation or current, objectively verifiable information 
about the risks associated with a particular condition; and (4) 
whether the medical opinion is contradicted by information 
known or observed by the employer (e.g., information about 
the employee's actual experience in the current or previous 
job(s)).  Remember that it is ultimately the employer who is 
responsible for the final decision, not the doctor.
 
Who pays when the employee is sent to the employer's 
health care professional? 

The EEOC has taken the position that if an employer requires 
an employee to go to a health care provider of the 
employer's choice, the employer must pay all costs 
associated with the visit(s).

What about requiring all employees to report their 
prescription medications?

This type of broad inquiry would not generally be 
permissible.  The EEOC has stated that in a few narrow 
exceptions, such as requiring policemen to report 
medications that could impact their ability to handle a 
firearm, or requiring pilots to report medications that would 
impact on their ability to fly, the inquiry would be job-related 
and consistent with business necessity. 

An argument could also be made that in other jobs where 
safety is an issue, for example, certain construction, 
manufacturing, and driving jobs, it may be job-related and 
consistent with business necessity to require employees to 
report medications that would impair their performance.  
Note, however, that this appears to be a broader approach 
than the EEOC's stated position. 

What if the employee refuses to answer a disability-
related question or submit to a medical exam?

The action the employer may take depends on its reason for 
making the inquiry or requiring the exam.  If the requested 
medical exam relates to performance problems on the job, 
any discipline that the employer decides to impose should 
focus on the employee's performance problems.  Thus, the 
employer may discipline the employee for past and future 
performance problems in accordance with a uniformly 
applied policy. 

If the employee refuses to answer a disability-related 
question or submit to a medical exam after requesting a 
reasonable accommodation, and the disability and need for an 
accommodation is not obvious, the employer could refuse to 
provide the accommodation.  If the requested 
accommodation was leave, the employer could deny the 
leave and refuse to excuse absences. 

Many courts would also construe the employee's failure to 
cooperate as a failure to engage in the ADA's interactive 
process to determine an effective reasonable 
accommodation, and would likely reject any later ADA claim 
made on this basis. 

How can employers make sure that employees can 
safely perform physical agility or fitness tests?

Employers that require physical agility or physical fitness 
tests may ask an employee to have a doctor certify that s/he 
can safely perform the test.  The employer would be entitled 
to a note which simply states that the person can safely 
perform the test or, alternatively, an explanation of why the 
person cannot perform the test.  An employer could not ask 
for complete medical records or any other medical 
information going beyond the individual's ability to safely 
perform the test.

Leave Issues

The following three questions assume that the employee has 
used sick, annual, or some other type of leave due to a 
medical condition, but has not taken leave under the Family 
and Medical Leave Act of 1994 (FMLA). 
 
What about requiring doctor's notes regarding the use 
of sick leave?

An employer may ask an employee to justify his/her use of 
sick leave by providing a doctor's note or other explanation, 
as long as it has a policy or practice of requiring all 
employees, with and without disabilities, to do so under 
similar circumstances. 

Can the employer request periodic updates when an 
employee is on extended leave?

Yes.  If the employee's leave request did not specify an 
exact or reasonably specific return date, or if additional leave 
is being requested, the employer may require the employee to 
provide periodic updates on his condition and possible date 
of return.  Note, however, that when the employer has 
granted a fixed amount of leave and no additional leave has 
been requested, the EEOC has taken the position that it 
would not be permissible to ask for periodic updates.  An 
employer may always call an employee on extended leave to 
express concern for their health or check on their progress. 

Are return-to-work releases or exams allowed?

When an employee has been on leave, the employer may 
request a "return to work" release from the employee's 
treating physician or may require a "return to work" exam if 
the employer has a reasonable belief that an employee's 
present ability to perform essential job functions is impaired 
by a medical condition or that s/he poses a direct threat due 
to a medical condition.  Usually, only inquiries or medical 
exams related to the condition for which the person took 
leave would be warranted.  

Example:  An attorney breaks his leg skiing and is on leave 
for four weeks.  He returns to work on crutches.  The 
employer does not have a reasonable belief that the attorney 
will be unable to perform the essential functions of his job or 
pose a direct threat because of the injury.  The employer 
could not make disability-related inquires or require a medical 
exam, but could ask the person how they were doing or 
express concern. 

Example:  As the result of problems with his medication, an 
employee with a known psychiatric disability threatens 
several colleagues and is disciplined.  Shortly afterwards, he 
is hospitalized for six weeks for treatment related to his 
condition.  Two days after his release, he returns to work 
with a note that states on the "he is cleared to return to 
work."  Because the employer has a reasonable belief, based 
on objective evidence, that the employee will pose a direct 
threat due to a medical condition, the employer may ask the 
employee for additional documentation regarding his 
medication or treatment or request that he submit to a 
medical examination. 

What about requests for leave under the FMLA?

The FMLA, enforced by the Department of Labor, sets forth 
its own requirements for employers and employees in regard 
to leave.  The EEOC has stated that when an employee 
requests leave under the FMLA for a serious health 
condition, employers will not violate the ADA by asking for 
the information in the FMLA certification form.  The FMLA 
only requests information relating to the particular serious 
health condition, as defined in the FMLA, for which the 
employee is seeking leave.  An employer is entitled to know 
why an employee is requesting time off from work under the 
FMLA.  If inquiries are precisely tailored in this manner, they 
would be job-related and consistent with business necessity 
under the ADA.

Periodic Monitoring 

May employers require periodic medical examinations 
of employees in positions affecting public safety?

Yes.  In limited circumstances, periodic medical 
examinations and other monitoring of employees in public 
safety positions, (e.g., fire fighters and policemen) that are 
narrowly tailored to address specific job-related concerns 
may be job-related and consistent with business necessity. 

Example:  A fire department could require its firefighters 
(but not the firehouse administrative staff) to have a 
comprehensive visual exam every two years and have an 
annual electrocardiogram because it is concerned that certain 
visual disorders and heart problems will affect their ability to 
do their job without posing a direct threat.  

If an employer decides to terminate or take other adverse 
action against an employee with a disability based on the 
results of a medical exam, it must demonstrate that the 
employee is unable to perform his/her essential functions, or 
in fact, poses a direct threat that cannot be reduced or 
eliminated by reasonable accommodation.  The employer 
could conduct additional medical testing after discovering the 
condition in order to make this determination. 

May an employer require an employee, who has been 
off from work in a alcohol rehabilitation program, to 
submit to periodic alcohol testing when she returns to 
work?

Yes, but only if the employer has a reasonable belief, based 
on objective evidence, that the employee will pose a direct 
threat in the absence of periodic testing.  This would require 
an individualized assessment and could not be based on 
general assumptions.  The employer would need to consider 
the safety risks associated with the position, the 
consequences of the employee's inability or impaired ability 
to perform job functions, and how recently the event(s) 
occurred that cause the employer to believe that the 
employee would pose a direct threat.  At some point, when 
the employee has repeatedly tested negative for alcohol, 
continued testing may not be job-related and consistent with 
business necessity because the employer no longer has a 
reasonable belief that the employee will pose a direct threat.

Example:  A bus driver informs his supervisor that he has a 
history of alcoholism and after many years of sobriety has 
started drinking a couple of glasses of wine at night to deal 
with family stress.  He requests and is granted leave to enter 
a rehabilitation program.  After four months, he is cleared to 
return to work.  Given the safety risks associated with his 
position, his short period of employment, and his recent 
completion of rehab, the employer can show that it would be 
job-related and consistent with business necessity to subject 
the driver to frequent periodic alcohol tests following his 
return to work.

Employers may also conduct periodic alcohol testing based 
on a "last chance" agreement related to disciplinary actions 
involving employee use of alcohol.  This type of agreement 
typically provides that, as a condition of continued 
employment, employees must enter into a rehabilitation 
program and submit to periodic alcohol testing.

Other Acceptable Disability-Related Inquiries and 
Medical Examinations of Employees 

What may an EAP counselor ask?

An Employee Assistance Program (EAP) counselor may ask 
an employee seeking help for personal problems about their 
medical conditions as long as s/he does not act on behalf of 
the employer, is obligated to shield the information from 
decisionmakers, and has no power to affect employment 
decisions.  Many employers contract with outside EAP 
contractors so that employees are not concerned about 
confidentiality.

May an employer make disability-related inquiries that 
are required by another federal law?


Yes.  An employer may make disability-related inquiries or 
require medical exams that are mandated or necessitated by 
another federal law or regulation.  For example, federal 
safety regulations require interstate truck drivers to undergo 
medical examinations at least once every two years.  Pilots 
and flight attendants must also meet federal medical 
requirements.  Other federal laws requiring medical exams 
include the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), the 
Federal Mine Health and Safety Act and other federal statutes 
requiring the periodic monitoring of employees exposed to 
toxic or hazardous substances.

May an employer make disability-related inquiries or 
conduct medical examinations that are part of a 
voluntary wellness program?

Yes.  The ADA allows employers to conduct voluntary 
medical examinations and activities, including voluntary 
medical histories that are part of an employee health 
program, without having to show that they are job-related 
and consistent with business necessity, as long as these 
medical records are kept confidential and separate from 
personnel records.  These programs often include blood 
pressure screening, cholesterol testing, glaucoma testing, 
and cancer detection screening.  A voluntary wellness 
program is voluntary as long as an employer neither requires 
participation nor penalizes employees who do not participate.

What about exams related to workers' compensation 
injuries?

State workers' compensation statutes typically allow 
employers to investigate and contest employees' claims for 
work-related injuries.  The EEOC has stated that the ADA 
does not prohibit an employer or its agent (for example, 
workers' compensation carriers) from asking disability-
related questions or requiring medical exams that are 
necessary to determine the extent of its workers' 
compensation liability.  However, such inquiries or exams 
must be limited in scope to the occupational injury and its 
impact on the individual, and may not be required more often 
than is necessary to determine the person's initial or 
continued eligibility for workers' compensation benefits. 
 
May an employer ask employees to voluntarily self-
identify as persons with disabilities for affirmative 
action purposes?

Yes.  An employer may ask employees to voluntarily self-
identify as individuals with disabilities when the employer is: 

?	undertaking affirmative action because of a federal, state 
or local law (including a veteran's preference law) that 
requires affirmative action for individuals with 
disabilities; or
?	voluntarily using the information to benefit individuals 
with disabilities.

The EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Disability-Related 
Inquiries and Medical Examinations sets forth some other 
detailed requirements for employers who invite employees to 
self-identify in either of these situations. 



Resources

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline,
(800) 949-4232 (voice/TDD).

For additional information on the topics discussed in this 
brochure, employers and employees are encouraged to 
consult the following EEOC documents: 

EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Disability-Related Inquiries 
and Medical Examinations 

EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Workers' Compensation and 
the ADA

EEOC Technical Assistance Fact Sheet on the Family and 
Medical Leave Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
1801 L Street, N.W., Washington, D.C.  20507;
1-800-669-4000 (voice), 1-800-669-6820 (TTY) to reach 
field offices; 1-800-669-EEOC (voice), 1-800-800-
3302(TTY) for publications; web: www.eeoc.gov 
(publications available online)  

For additional information on the Family and Medical Leave 
Act, the Department of Labor should be contacted.

U.S. Department of Labor  (National Office) 
Employment Standards Administration
Wage and Hour Division
200 Constitution Ave., N.W. 
Washington, D.C.  20210

Toll-free Wage-Hour Information and Help Line: 
0-865-486-9243	(Available 8am-5pm in your time zone).
http://www.dol.gov

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University.  
It was developed for Cornell University by Sheila D. Duston, an 
attorney/mediator practicing in the Washington, D.C. 
metropolitan area.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials Development 
Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of the ADA 
(Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of 
new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on 
Employment and Disability, the Pacific Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center, and other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the training and co-
management division of the Northeast Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also conducting 
employment policy and practices research, examining private 
and federal sector employer responses to disability civil rights 
legislation.  This research has been funded by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (Grant #H133A70005) and the 
Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org.


Disclaimer

This material was produced by the Program on Employment and 
Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations - Extension 
Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant from the 
National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research 
(grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions 
about the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in 
this material are those of the author, and do not necessarily 
reflect the viewpoint of the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's interpretations 
of the ADA are reflected in its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 
1630) and its Technical Assistance Manual for Title I of the Act.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.



Employee Medical Exams and Disability-Related Inquiries under the ADA

January 2001	CORNELL UNIVERSITY
