Disability Employment Policies and Practices in Private and Federal Sector 
Organizations 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Susanne M. Bruyère 
Cornell University,
April, 2000 


Funds for the preparation of this report have been provided by the Program on 
Employment and Disability in the School of Industrial and Labor Relations Extension 
Division at Cornell University. 

The research discussed in this publication has been funded by: 
* The US Department of Education, National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research, Research and Demonstration Grant to Cornell University (# H133A70005) 
* The Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities 

Citations of this publication should be made as follows: 
S. Bruyère (2000). Disability Employment Policies and Practices in Private and Federal 
Sector Organizations. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University, School of Industrial and Labor 
Relations Extension Division, Program on Employment and Disability. 


Survey Purpose and Sponsorship 

Approximately one in six people has a disability, yet people with disabilities are often 
greatly under or unemployed compared to their non-disabled peers.  This represents a 
significant loss of willing and able talent to both private and public sector organizations, 
as well as loss of income and social and economic  participation for people with 
disabilities. This disparity is a function of inequity that has permeated social  policy, 
access to education, training, and employment,  as well as society's attitudes. To address 
this disparity, both the US Department of Education National  Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research  (NIDRR) (grant #H133A70005) and the Presidential  Task 
Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities  have separately funded initiatives to 
examine employer  practices in response to the ADA. 

The Survey Methodology 
Two ten-page parallel surveys covering issues dealing with the employment provisions of 
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), and for federal sector organizations 
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended, were used to survey a random sample of the 
membership of the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM), the entire 
membership of the Washington Business Group on Health (WBGH), and the human 
resource (HR) and equal employment opportunity (EEO) personnel in all US federal 
agencies. 

A stratified sample by employer size was drawn from the total membership population 
for the Society for Human Resource Management sample. A sample of 1,402 names, 
telephone numbers, and addresses of the Society for Human Resource Management 
(SHRM) members was obtained from SHRM. These members were randomly selected 
based on the size of the organization they worked for. The goal was to have a random 
sample of individuals from small, medium, and large organizations in the U. S. Of the 
original sample, 1116 were eligible respondents and 813 responses (a 73 percent response 
rate) were received.  The response rates were similar for each size group.  The 
Washington Business Group on Health (WBGH) study was conducted on the 164 WBGH 
member companies. A 32 percent (n= 52) response rate was obtained. While the term 
"private sector" is used throughout, about four percent of the respondents listed "public 
administration" as their industry type.  These public administration respondents had little 
impact on the results and have been included in our  "private sector" category. For the 
federal sector agency representatives, a list was obtained of all human resource and equal 
Employment Opportunity personnel across all 96 US federal agencies. A total of 403 
surveys were completed, out of 415 agency representatives who were contacted (a 97 
percent response rate). 

Survey Results 

Respondent Characteristics 
There are significantly more respondents from small employers (fewer than 250 
employees) in the private sector sample (40 percent, compared to 21 percent in the 
federal. There are also significantly more large employers in the federal sample, both in 
the 1,500- 4,999 employees category (13 percent of private employers, 27 percent of 
federal), and in the 5,000 and above category (14 percent for private, 23 percent for 
federal). There was also a statistically significant difference between groups where the 
respondents' number of years with the organization is concerned. Approximately seven 
of ten employer representatives responding to these surveys from private organizations 
were with their respective organizations ten or fewer years. Federal agency 
representatives, in contrast, were predominantly with their agencies for more than ten 
years (30 percent had been employed with their agencies for 11-20 years; 29 percent 
more than 20 years). 

Organizations are Making ADA-Related Accommodations 

Private organizations and federal agencies are responding to disability nondiscrimination 
legislation by making accommodations for applicants and employees with disabilities. 
Across 11 possible areas where accommodation could be made, survey respondents most 
commonly reported making changes by making existing facilities accessible, being 
flexible in the application of HR policies, and restructuring jobs and work hours. Other 
often-made changes by both groups were modifying the work environment and making 
transportation accommodations. Least often made accommodations were in the areas of 
modifying training materials and making changes in supervisory methods. There was a 
statistically significant difference in the groups' responses to making these changes in all 
of the 11 categories, with federal agencies more likely to have made each change. These 
significant differences were driven by the fact that the private sector organizations were 
much more likely to indicate that they had "never needed" to make the change. Private 
sector organizations were as likely to make the accommodation (96% or more said yes) 
when there "was a need." 

Employers Find Making Pre-employment Accommodations Easy 

Those surveyed were asked about their response to making changes in the recruitment, 
pre-employment screening, testing and orientation processes to comply with civil rights 
legislation for people with disabilities, and the degree of difficulty they experienced in 
making these changes. Across the ten possible areas where changes might have been 
made, 10-60% of all organizations reported not having needed to make these changes. Of 
those who did need to make changes in response to the ADA in these processes, most 
respondents indicated that they were relatively easy to make. 

Areas that respondents indicated were more difficult to change in both sectors were 
making information accessible for people with visual or learning impairments and 
making information accessible for people with hearing impairments. There was a 
statistically significant difference between sectors in their response in three of the ten 
categories for accommodation. For example, private sector respondents reported more 
difficulty with making information accessible for persons with visual impairments (36 
percent compared to 15 percent for federal respondents), and private employers reported 
more difficulty with providing information in an accessible way for people with hearing 
impairments (25 percent and 8 percent, for private and federal respondents respectively). 
Federal agency representatives expressed less difficulty in every listed change except for 
one: providing medical tests post offer, which four percent of private respondents found 
difficult, compared to six percent of federal respondents (not statistically significant). 

Respondents Less Familiar with Accommodations for People with Visual or Auditory 
Impairments 

Respondents were presented with a number of employment disability nondiscrimination 
compliance considerations in the applicant interview process and asked how familiar 
their organizations' interview staff is with each of these elements. In general, respondents 
reported the highest levels of familiarity with framing questions about job tasks, 
restrictions on eliciting medical information, when to ask about how the applicant would 
perform job tasks, and restrictions on obtaining medical information. Across groups, 
respondents were much less familiar with accommodations for people with visual or 
hearing impairments:  adapting print materials for people with visual impairments, use of 
a reader for a person with a visual impairment, and the use of TTY/ text telephones to set 
up interviews. Federal sector respondents indicated a much greater familiarity with 
accessing sign language interpreters, with 76 percent of federal respondents reporting 
their staff was "familiar" or "very familiar" with this issue compared to 33 percent of 
private sector respondents. Federal respondents, while least familiar with 
accommodations for visual or hearing impairments, were far more familiar with them 
than their private sector counterparts. The private and federal respondents showed 
statistically significant differences in their responses in five of the eight areas presented. 

Respondents Identify Barriers to Employment and Advancement for People with 
Disabilities 

Respondents were presented with seven possible barriers to the employment and 
advancement of people with disabilities. Interestingly, in both the federal and private 
sectors, cost of training, supervision, and of accommodations for applicants or employees 
with disabilities were least likely to be rated as significant continuing barriers, compared 
to other areas. The largest continuing barriers to employment and advancement for 
persons with disabilities reported by both federal and private sector employers were lack 
of related experience (49 percent reported by private and 53 percent by federal), and lack 
of requisite skills and training in the applicant or employee with a disability (39 percent 
for private respondents and 45 percent for federal). The next most often cited was 
supervisor knowledge of how to make accommodations  (31 percent in the private sector 
and 34 percent in the federal). Attitudes or stereotypes among co-workers and supervisors 
towards persons with disabilities was seen as the third most significant barrier among 
federal respondents (43 percent), and fifth among private sector respondents (22 percent). 

Not only were respondents asked to identify possible employment and advancement 
barriers, but they were also asked to rate the effectiveness of six listed means of reducing 
such barriers. There was no difference in the top means identified by both sectors, that 
being visible top management commitment (81 percent for the private respondents, 90 
percent for federal). The next three most popular means to reduce barriers were ranked 
very closely within both respondent groups, though there was a statistically significant 
difference between groups. These means were: staff training, with 62 percent of private 
and 71 percent of federal reporting this as an effective or very effective way of reducing 
barriers; mentoring (59 and 71 percent for private and federal, respectively); and on-site 
consultation or technical assistance (58 percent and 71 percent, respectively). Tax 
incentives were seen as the least effective means to reduce such barriers by private sector 
employers; indeed only 26 percent reported these as effective or very effective in 
reducing barriers. A parallel item on special budget allocations as a way to reduce 
accommodation costs to employers was asked on the federal survey. Sixty-nine percent 
of those interviewed saw this as effective or very effective in reducing barriers. 

In both sample groups, those surveyed were asked about whether they had made certain 
changes in the workplace in order to meet the needs of employees with disabilities, and 
asked to rate the degree in difficulty in making those changes. In both groups, the change 
most often made but also seen as the most difficult to make was changing co-worker or 
supervisor attitudes toward the employee with a disability (32 percent of private and 33 
percent of federal representatives indicated this change was "difficult" or "very 
difficult"). 

Interactions Between ADA and Other Employment Legislation 

Interviewees were asked about their degree of uncertainty in the interaction between 
disability discrimination legislation and other employment and health and safety 
legislation. In the private sector survey, organization representatives were asked about 
their perceptions of degree of uncertainty between the ADA and the Family and Medical 
Leave Act (FMLA), Workers' Compensation (injured workers), the Occupational Safety 
and Health Act (OSHA), and the Drug-Free Workplace or Omnibus Transportation 
Employee Testing Acts. In the federal survey, the same questions were asked, and 
additional information was elicited about the degree of uncertainty respondents 
experienced in the Rehabilitation Act's requirements on implementing affirmative action 
and purchasing accessible technology and equipment. 

There was a statistically significant difference in the groups' responses for five of the nine 
categories.  Private sector respondents reported significantly more uncertainty about the 
interaction of the ADA and other employment and health and safety legislation than their 
federal counterparts. The areas where there was the greatest uncertainty for private sector 
respondents were in coordination of the ADA and the Family and Medical Leave Act, 
and the interplay between the ADA and work-related injury. Results were similar among 
respondents from the federal sector. 

HR Professionals/ Employer Representatives Receive Training on ADA Related Topics 

The private sector survey asked respondents if their organizations' employees have been 
trained in twelve ADA related areas, and the federal survey added two additional 
Rehabilitation-Act related questions. The training profiles for both groups were, on the 
whole, very similar. The areas in which training was most often conducted were the 
accommodation process  (71 percent and 87 percent, respectively for the private and 
federal) and non-discriminatory recruiting and hiring (85 percent and 91 percent, 
respectively).  Areas where the least training was conducted were allowable limitations 
on health plans, interaction with other legislation, written resources on accommodations, 
and accommodations for people with mental health disabilities. In both respondent 
groups, the area with the most interest in further information was accommodations for 
persons with mental health disabilities (65 percent of private sector respondents and 69 
percent of federal respondents expressed a desire for more information). 

Legal Counsel Widely Used to Resolve ADA Issues 

The survey asked respondents to rate twelve often-used resources to handle 
accommodations and disability nondiscrimination issues. Across both groups, legal 
counsel (internal or external) ranked highly as a resource often used to resolve ADA 
disputes (82 and 85 percent for the private and federal respectively). 

This was the most-often used resource for the private sector, and a close second in the 
federal group, topped only by the agency EEO office (90 percent for federal 
respondents). The next most often used in the private sector were professional societies 
such as the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM), safety and disability 
staff within the organization. For the federal group, after EEO and legal advisors the next 
most often used resources to resolve ADA disputes were safety staff and state 
rehabilitation agencies (72 and 70 percent). 

Disability Management/ Return-to-Work Programs Contribute to ADA Compliance 

Organizational representatives were asked if they had a disability management or return 
to work program, and the degree to which that program contributes to compliance with 
the respective disability nondiscrimination legislation in their organization. The majority 
of respondents in both groups reported having formal or informal programs, though the 
private sector had a significantly higher number. 

Of those who have disability management or return to work programs, they report that 
these programs contributed to implementation of the ADA in a number of ways, 
including (in order of priority): importance of confidentiality (85 and 89 percent for the 
private and federal respectively); raising acceptance for persons with disabilities in the 
workplace (73 and 88 percent respectively); increasing supervisor awareness of the 
accommodation process (75 and 87 percent respectively); and creating an organizational 
structure for accommodations (71 and 79 percent respectively).

 Summary and Implications 

This report identifies how private and federal employers are responding to the 
employment disability nondiscrimination requirements of the Americans with Disabilities 
Act and the Rehabilitation Act. The results indicate that while much progress has been 
made, barriers remain to the recruitment, hiring, retention, and career advancement of 
adults with disabilities in the workforce that warrant consideration. 

The majority of organizations from both sectors report having made changes in their 
existing recruitment, pre-employment screening, testing, and orientation procedures in 
order to comply with disability nondiscrimination and civil rights laws. However, making 
information accessible for a person with a visual or learning disability, or a person who is 
deaf or hard of hearing, were areas reported more difficult than others. Respondents 
indicated that their interview staff are least familiar with interview considerations relating 
to people with visual or auditory impairments, such as using a text telephone or relay 
service to set up interviews with deaf or hard of hearing applicants, using a reader to 
assist a person with a visual impairment or learning disability, or with adapting print 
materials used in interviews to large print, diskette, or Braille. With an aging workforce, 
knowledge of accommodations for persons with visual and hearing impairments will 
increasingly become important for employers. It is estimated that the US workforce in the 
55-64 year old range will increase 40 percent in the next ten years. 

Another area for further exploration is the workplace supports needed for persons with 
psychiatric disabilities.  Respondents in both the private and federal sectors indicated a 
need for further information on accommodations for persons with psychiatric disabilities.  
This, again, may be a place where federal and private sector employers can join to find 
effective solutions to enhance the hiring and retention of this group. 

Some remaining barriers to employment for persons with disabilities identified by both 
sectors were in the workplace itself. Attitudes toward people with disabilities continues 
as a workplace integration issue, even though this was an area where most organizations 
in both sectors reported having made changes. Perhaps in both sectors this is an area that 
can be merged with diversity programming or addressed independently with continued 
training across all personnel. 

Supervisors' lack of knowledge about accommodations was also reported as an ongoing 
barrier in the work environment for persons with disabilities. Since the majority of 
training in both employment sectors has been focused on human resource personnel in 
the past, this is not surprising, and a place where training and technical assistance should 
be focused in the future. Supervisors are an integral part of the accommodation process in 
most workplaces. And, since supervisors reportedly make the final decision on 
accommodations in most federal workplaces, it is imperative that they have the training 
needed to be able to make appropriate decisions and access needed resources for 
particular accommodation requests. 

Both sectors reported that having a formal or informal disability management program 
contributes to implementation of civil rights laws for people with disabilities.  This is an 
area that should be further explored as a programmatic structure for support for 
workplace disability nondiscrimination policies and practices. 

In workplaces that had unions, whether private or federal sector, when unions were 
involved, they were reportedly beneficial in the accommodation process.  Focus groups 
with unions might be a good place to continue information gathering in this process to 
learn more about barriers to employment for people with disabilities, and how unions can 
be engaged to help to address continuing attitudinal issues toward persons with 
disabilities. 

One of the areas across both private and federal organizations seen as a remaining barrier 
to the employment of people with disabilities is the lack of requisite training, skills, and 
related work experience in persons with disabilities. These identified barriers have 
implications for employment and disability social policy changes that advance the 
interests of people with disabilities in the employment and training arena.  National 
employment and training policies that provide persons with disabilities with training and 
experience resulting in skills that are marketable in a labor market that needs skilled 
workers are imperative. 

Full Survey Reports Available 

A copy of the full survey report is available from the Cornell University Program on 
Employment and disability at 607-255-7727 (Voice); 607-255-2891 (TTY); 
607-255-2763 (Fax); or e-mail Susanne M. Bruyère at smb23@ cornell.edu. 

A copy of the full survey report is available online at: http:// www. ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ 
projects/  ADA_ Projects/ PPFSO/. Copies of individual survey reports for each of the 
collaborating organizations are available either from Cornell University or the  
organizations at the contact information below: 

*Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities (PTFEAD): Call 
202-693-4939  (Voice), 202-693-4929 (Fax), 202-693-4920 (TTY), or  available to 
download from http:// www. ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ projects/ ADA_ Projects/ PTF/ptf_ 
final_ report.pdf 

* Society Human Resource Management (SHRM):  To order a copy of the full survey 
report, call the  SHRMStore at 1-800-444-5006. The cost is $39.95 for SHRM members 
and $49.95 for nonmembers (item code 62.17023) 

*Washington Business Group Health (WBGH):  Call 202-408-9320 (Voice), or 202-408-
9332 (Fax), or available to download from http:// www. ilr.cornell.edu/ped/projects/ 
ADA_ Projects/ IEP/ SURVEYS/ WBGH_survey html 

For more information contact: 
Susanne M. Bruyère Director 
Program on Employment and Disability 
School of Industrial and Labor Relations 
106 ILR Extension
Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901 
607-255-7727 (Voice) 
607-255-2891 (TTY) 
607-255-2763 (Fax) 

E-mail: smb23@ cornell. edu 
Web: http:// www. ilr. cornell. edu/ ped 7

©2000 Cornell University.
