Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government Agencies:
EEO/HR and Supervisor Perspectives

Research conducted by
Cornell University
Program on Employment and Disability
School of Industrial and Labor Relations
Extension Division
Ithaca, New York
September 2002

©2002 Cornell University

Citations of this publication should be made as follows: Bruyère, S., Erickson, W., & 
Horne, R. (2002). Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal 
Government Agencies: EEO/HR and Supervisor Perspectives. Report by the Presidential 
Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University, 
School of Industrial and Labor Relations—Extension Division, Program on Employment 
and Disability. 

This document was developed by Cornell University, Program on Employment and 
Disability, School of Industrial Relations —Extension Division, funded by a grant from 
the Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities (Grant No. E-9-4-
0-0088). The opinions herein do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of the U.S. 
Department of Labor or the Federal government. Nor does the mention of trade names, 
commercial products, or organizations imply the endorsement of the Federal 
Government. 
Graphic Design: Julie Manners

Table of Contents
Acknowledgements
Background
Organization of the Report
 Methodology
Sampling Methodology
Survey Respondents
 Findings at a Glance
HR/EEO
Supervisors
HR/EEO /Supervisor Comparisons
Summary of the Federal HR/EEO Survey
Agencies Report on Accommodation Policies and Practices for Employees
Processing, Tracking, and Reporting Systems for Accommodations
Agencies Report on Accommodations for Applicants
Familiarity with Civil Rights Considerations
Barriers to Employment for People with Disabilities and Ways to Overcome Them
Agency Experience of Disability Discrimination Claims
Training Provided on Civil Rights-Related Topics
Resources Used to Resolve Disability Discrimination and Accommodation Issues
 Disability Management Programs and Disability Nondiscrimination and Accommodation
 Summary of the Federal Supervisor Survey
 Supervisors Report on Accommodations for Applicants
Familiarity with Interview Considerations and Accommodations
Supervisors Report on Accommodation Practices
Supervisor Experience Making Accommodations
Kinds of Accommodations Made
Accommodation Resources Used and Found Helpful
Opportunities for Promotion/Training for People with Disabilities
Supervisor Experience in Resolving Disability Discrimination Issues
Training on Civil Rights-Related Topics
Disability Management and Workplace Accommodation
Awareness of and Implementation to Date of Presidential Orders
Comparison of Selected Survey Items
Summary and Implications
Appendices
Appendix A: HR/EEO Survey
Appendix B: Supervisor Survey
Appendix C: List of Agencies Participating in HR/EEO Survey
Appendix D: List of Agencies Participating in Supervisor Survey
Appendix E: HR/EEO Respondent Demographics
Appendix F: Supervisor Respondent Demographics
Appendix G: Additional Resources

Acknowledgements
These surveys were conducted by Cornell University. This research was made possible 
with funding and leadership provided by the Presidential Task Force on Employment of 
Adults with Disabilities. Dr. Richard Horne, Senior Policy Advisor, served as the Project 
Officer.

Dr. Susanne M. Bruyère, Director, and William A. Erickson, Research Specialist, of the 
Program on Employment and Disability led the Cornell University efforts.

The staff of the Cornell University Computer-Assisted Survey Team (CAST) and its 
Director Yasamin DiCiccio conducted the telephone surveys. Carolyn Wong, Student 
Assistant, identified needed contact information for respondents, and Sara VanLooy, 
Research Assistant, provided research and administrative support.

Many individuals within specific agencies made this project possible by their significant 
assistance in helping with survey design, sample selection, and in locating participants. 
Many thanks to our Federal agency partners who cooperated in these studies, helping 
contribute to the better than 90 percent response rates in both surveys. Lists of all 
participating agencies can be found in the Appendices. 

Background

The Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities (Task Force) was 
established by Executive Order 13078 to create a coordinated and aggressive national 
policy to increase the employment rate of persons with disabilities. Seventeen Federal 
agencies have served as members of the Task Force. Secretary of Labor Elaine L. Chao 
served as Task Force Chair. The other member agencies are the Department of 
Education, Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Health and Human Services, 
the Social Security Administration, Department of the Treasury, Department of 
Commerce, Department of Transportation, Office of Personnel Management, Small 
Business Administration, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Federal 
Communications Commission, National Council on Disability, Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, Department of the Interior, Department of Agriculture, and 
Department of Justice.

The Task Force provided support to Cornell University to conduct research in order to 
address the Task Force mandate that relates to the Federal government as a model 
employer of people with disabilities. This research is a part of the efforts of the Task 
Force to meet the Section 2(a) mandate of the Executive Order. This mandate states that 
“The Office of Personnel Management, the Department of Labor, and the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission shall submit to the Task Force a review of Federal 
Government personnel laws, regulations, and policies and, as appropriate, shall 
recommend or implement changes necessary to improve Federal employment policy for 
adults with disabilities. This review shall include personnel practices and actions such as: 
hiring, promotion, benefits, retirement, workers’ compensation, retention, accessible 
facilities, job accommodations, layoffs, and reductions in force.”

The first step in this endeavor was to conduct an analysis of the policy and practice 
efforts of Federal agency Human Resource (HR) Directors and Equal Employment 
Opportunity (EEO) personnel in recruiting and retaining persons with disabilities in 
Federal employment. The survey of U. S. Federal agencies, titled Survey of the Federal 
Government on Human Resources/EEO Policies and Practices in Employment of People 
with Disabilities was completed in 1999. This research identified how Federal agencies 
were responding to the employment disability nondiscrimination requirements of the 
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, *1 as 
amended. In November 1999, the Task Force released the results of this survey in a 
report, Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U. S. Federal Government 
Agencies, which included recommendations based on the findings from the study.*2

One of the recommendations from this research was to conduct a follow-up study of 
Federal agency supervisors and managers about their experience in accommodation and 
employment of persons with disabilities in the Federal sector, and in addition to inquire 
about their awareness of the series of Executive Orders issued in 2000 supporting 
employment and accommodation of individuals with disabilities in the Federal 
workforce. This second survey activity was initiated in Spring of 2001. The report from 
this study, titled Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in 
Employment of People with Disabilities, provides information on the results from this 
current survey of supervisors and managers, which parallels similar information obtained 
from the initial survey of human resource and EEO professionals across the Federal 
government. It describes supervisors’ experiences with accommodation of people with 
disabilities as applicants and employees in the Federal workforce, and their experience 
and perceptions of the effectiveness of existing and proposed resources to facilitate the 
hiring, retention, and accommodation of people with disabilities. This report is a 
summary of major findings from each of these surveys, and in addition includes a 
comparison across selected items where appropriate. This final analysis enabled us to 
look at the differing perspectives of these two informant groups, where possible.

Cornell University, founded in 1868, is one of the Ivy League institutions in the 
Northeastern United States, and is based upon a unique integration of publicly and 
privately funded colleges. The Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor 
Relations is the foremost school of its kind in the world, boasting over fifty years of 
leadership and service. It hosts the largest collection of scholars in human resources and 
issues related to the workplace, and includes the areas of human resources, organizational 
behavior, labor relations, collective bargaining, labor economics, and social statistics. 
The Extension Division of the School of Industrial and Labor Relations at Cornell 
University has provided continuing education and technical assistance, nationally and 
regionally, on issues surrounding the workplace and disability for over 30 years. The 
Program on Employment and Disability contributes to development of inclusive 
workplace systems and communities for people with disabilities through research, the 
development of training materials, dissemination of this information in training efforts 
regionally, nationally, and internationally, provision of technical assistance on related 
topics, and production of scholarly materials. The Computer-Assisted Survey Team 
(CAST) is a full-service survey facility housed in the School of Industrial and Labor 
Relations offering state-of the- art technology to researchers at Cornell University and 
elsewhere; this unit provided data collection and statistical analysis support for these 
surveys.

Organization of the Report

First, the results of these two surveys are presented as basic descriptive analysis. 
Following that is a comparative analysis of the results from the two groups, and finally, 
the implications of the survey results are discussed in the section titled “Summary and 
Implications.”

Methodology: Survey Instruments

The first survey was designed to capture information on the human resources and equal 
employment opportunity policies and practices of Federal agencies in response to the 
employment nondiscrimination requirements of Federal civil rights legislation. The 
survey items drew extensively from a similar survey used by Cornell University to 
conduct comparable research on private sector employers in 1998. *3 The ten-page 
survey covers issues dealing with: the reasonable accommodation process; recruitment, 
pre-employment screening, testing, and new employee orientation; health and other 
benefits of employment; opportunities for promotion and training; disciplinary 
process/grievance, dismissal or termination; interaction with labor/industrial/collective 
bargaining issues and other employment legislation/considerations; Federal agency 
employee training on the employment disability nondiscrimination and the 
accommodation process; resources used and found most helpful in handling disability 
nondiscrimination and accommodation disputes; and the role of disability management 
(return to work) programs in contributing to the accommodation process and the 
acceptance of employees with disabilities. A copy of this survey is provided in Appendix 
A.

The supervisor survey was based on the previous survey of Human Resources and EEO 
representatives described above. It was designed to capture information on the 
experiences and perceptions of supervisors and managers in the 17 Task Force member 
agencies in response to the employment nondiscrimination requirements of Federal civil 
rights legislation and recent Executive Branch directives and initiatives related to the 
accommodation process and the employment/ supervision of individuals with disabilities.

Several new sections and questions were designed to specifically address supervisors’ 
experience and the unique issues they deal with in the workplace as well as new rules or 
initiatives that had come into play since the HR/EEO survey had been performed two 
years prior. An additional section was included focusing on supervisors’ awareness and 
the impact of recent Executive Branch directives and initiatives, including Section 508, 
and the Federal initiative regarding telecommuting/telework for individuals with signifi- 
cant disabilities. A copy of the survey is provided in Appendix B.   


Sampling Methodology

For the HR/EEO survey, a list of 415 names including all upper level HR/EEO personnel 
across 96 Federal agencies was obtained from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management’s (OPM) Human Resources Management Group. A letter was sent to each 
potential interviewee approximately two weeks prior to the initiation of the survey. 
Interviews began in June 1999 and were completed in August 1999. A breakdown of 
respondents by agency is provided in Appendix C.

The initial sample of approximately 3,000 supervisors was randomly selected by the 
OPM from the pool of all supervisors in the 17 Task Force member agencies. This 
sample includes both supervisors and managers with supervisory duties as defined by 
OPM’s classification system. For simplification in describing the results, in the remainder 
of this report the term “supervisor” will be used to refer to the participants of the study. 
The sampling strategy included oversampling for smaller agencies and blue-collar 
supervisors to provide adequate numbers, allowing for more accurate estimates for these 
potentially unique groups. Contact information (e-mail addresses and phone numbers) for 
the supervisors selected was solicited from each participating agency, resulting in 2,448 
supervisors with complete information. Except for the National Council on Disability, 
which has only two supervisors, information from 50 supervisors was the desired 
minimum from each agency, with larger agencies getting proportionally more above this 
minimum. The overall target for the survey was 1,000 respondents.

For the supervisor survey, respondents received a notification via e-mail (letters were 
used in the case of the Department of Veterans’ Affairs) from the Task Force explaining 
the project and requesting their participation. Respondents were then contacted by 
telephone a few days later to arrange for an interview time. Data collection began July 
13, 2001 and was completed January 10, 2002. Participants were required to have been a 
supervisor of at least one employee and have at least twelve months of actual supervisory 
experience. See Appendix D for sample breakdown by agency. Both surveys were 
conducted by telephone by Cornell University’s Computer Assisted Survey Team 
(CAST) using a CATI (Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing) system.

The analysis of the supervisor survey also included a comparison of supervisors who 
reported supervising employees with disabilities to those who had no such experience on 
selected questions. As supervisors with employees with disabilities were more likely to 
supervise larger numbers of employees (which could impact their responses), all of these 
analyses controlled for the number of employees supervised.

Note: All ”don’t know” and “refused” response categories are excluded from our analysis 
unless otherwise noted. Such responses are difficult to interpret and were quite rare in the 
supervisor survey—typically less than two percent on any given question. On average 
less than eight percent of the HR/EEO responses fell into these categories (range 0-19 
percent). The original HR/EEO report included these responses, but excluding them had 
little impact on the reported percentages, and the conclusions drawn are the same as in 
the first report

Survey Respondents

For the HR/EEO survey, a total of 403 surveys were completed out of the 415 agency 
representatives who were contacted (a 97 percent response rate). The majority of the 
respondents had job titles of directors/chiefs of human resources and EEO (41 percent) or 
personnel managers (18 percent), whose positions were in the functional areas of human 
resources (41 percent) or equal opportunity (35 percent). They responded primarily for 
the entire agency (49 percent) or a regional office (40 percent), of agencies that employ 
more than 500 employees (71 percent). Further information about respondent 
demographics is also available in Appendix E.

A total of 1,001 supervisor surveys were completed, comprised of 191 blue-collar and 
810 white-collar supervisors, across the 17 Task Force member agencies The response 
rate was excellent, with 93 percent of supervisors contacted participating. Agency and 
bluecollar/ white-collar completion targets were achieved in all but one agency. The 
supervisors surveyed had significant supervisory experience in the Federal government. 
A summary of selected supervisor characteristics is presented in Appendix F. Over half 
of the participating supervisors (56 percent) were senior management, in General 
Schedule grades of 13-15 (the overall range is 1-15, with 15 being the highest grade 
level). Over 95 percent of the supervisors surveyed had been with their agency five or 
more years. Fully half the respondents reported more than ten years of experience as a 
Federal supervisor, with 23 percent reporting six to ten years and 27 percent reporting 
between one and five years. As noted above, all respondents were required to have been a 
supervisor for at least one year and supervise at least one employee to participate in the 
survey. Over 85 percent of the supervisors contacted fulfilled these criteria.

In response to the question: “number of Federal employees you are the immediate 
supervisor of,” over a third of respondents (36 percent) supervised between 1-6 
employees, a third (33 percent) supervised between 7-12 employees, and the remainder 
(31 percent) supervised more than 12.


Findings at a Glance

HR/EEO

HR/EEO respondents at most agencies report having made accommodations for their 
employees with disabilities. At least nine out of ten respondents reported that their 
agency has made existing facilities accessible to employees with disabilities, been 
flexible in the application of HR policies, or modified the work environment. Agencies 
were less likely to acquire or modify training materials, or provide a job coach.

Seven out of ten reported that their agency has a formal process for handling 
accommodation requests. About a quarter of the respondents reported that the immediate 
supervisor of the employee making the request is responsible for making the final 
decision regarding the provision of an accommodation.

Slightly more than half of HR/EEO respondents reported that they had received ten or 
fewer accommodation requests in fiscal year 1999 to date, with one in five reporting that 
they had received no such requests.

A quarter of HR/EEO respondents frequently use Schedule A or B provisions for hiring 
persons with disabilities; half of the respondents reported occasionally using these 
provisions. Approximately a quarter reported frequently using the special hiring program 
for disabled veterans; about half reported occasionally using this program.

The pre-employment area where change was reported as difficult was making 
information accessible for a person who is deaf or hard of hearing, or for a person with a 
visual or learning disability.

HR/EEO respondents indicated that their interview staffs are least familiar with interview 
considerations relating to people with visual disabilities, or people who are deaf or hard 
of hearing. Such considerations include using a text telephone (TTY) or relay service to 
set up interviews with deaf or hard of hearing applicants; using a reader to assist a person 
with a visual impairment or learning disability; or adapting print materials used in 
interviews to large print, diskette, or Braille.

The barriers to employment for persons with disabilities identified were attitudes and 
stereotypes about people with disabilities, supervisors’ lack of knowledge about 
accommodations, lack of related experience, and lack of requisite skills and training in 
the person with a disability.

Nine out of ten HR/EEO respondents thought that the most effective means of barrier 
reduction is visible top management commitment.

The disability discrimination claims most commonly reported by agencies were: 1) 
failure to provide a reasonable accommodation; and 2) failure to promote.

Nearly three-quarters reported being covered by a collective bargaining agreement, and 
two thirds of those reported that unions are involved in the accommodation process.

Seven out of ten indicated that they would like more information on accommodation for 
psychiatric disabilities, and two-thirds wanted more information on Rehabilitation Act 
requirements.

Two-thirds of HR/EEO respondents reported that their agency has a formal or informal 
disability management program; respondents who have such a program indicated that 
these programs contribute to implementation of civil rights laws.

Supervisors

The supervisors surveyed had significant experience in the Federal government, with 
over half reporting ten or more years as a Federal supervisor.

Nearly two-thirds of the supervisors surveyed had at least one employee with a disability 
and/or had made at least one accommodation over the past five years or in their tenure as 
a Federal supervisor (whichever is less).

When asked about the kinds of accommodations made overall for employees with 
disabilities, supervisors most often reported having advocated to make existing facilities 
accessible to an employee with a disability, or modifying a work environment. The 
accommodations made by the fewest supervisors were reassignment to a vacant position 
and providing a job coach.

When asked who makes the final decision on the provision of an accommodation, half 
the supervisors indicated that either they make the decision in consultation with their 
immediate supervisor, or they make the decision themselves, as the immediate supervisor 
of the requesting employee.

Three-quarters of the supervisors indicated that their agency has a formal process in place 
for handling accommodations requests.

The resources for accommodation assistance used by the largest number of supervisors 
were human resource personnel at the central and servicing/subagency levels.

Close to half of the supervisors were not aware of the following accommodation 
resources: the Job Accommodation Network (JAN), the Disability Services Office, 
disabled employee advisory groups, and selective placement coordinators. Interestingly, 
supervisors with experience supervising one or more employees with disabilities were no 
more likely to be aware of these four resources than those without experience. However, 
they were more aware of Independent Living Centers, State Rehabilitation agencies and 
external health care providers as resources.

One-third of the supervisors reported being very involved in recruitment within their 
agency, with white-collar supervisors more likely to be involved than blue-collar.

Over half of the supervisors involved in recruitment reported being very familiar or 
somewhat familiar with the special hiring authorities for the Federal government that 
promote hiring disabled veterans, while approximately one-third were familiar with 
hiring readers/interpreters and other personal assistants for employees with disabilities, 
and the special hiring authorities for hiring people with cognitive disabilities (mental 
retardation), significant physical disabilities, or people who have recovered from mental 
illness. Supervisors with experience supervising one or more employees with disabilities 
reported greater familiarity with each of the special hiring authorities than those who had 
not supervised employees with disabilities.

Over half of the supervisors indicated that the agency set reasonable affirmative 
employment goals and made an effort to achieve these goals.

More than a third of supervisors surveyed reported being unfamiliar or very unfamiliar 
with accommodations for persons with communication disabilities, such as adapting print 
materials used in the interview (to large print, diskette, or Braille), using a reader to assist 
a person with a learning disability or visual impairment, using a teletypewriter (TTY) or 
relay service to set up interviews, and accessing sign language interpreters. Surprisingly, 
supervisors with experience supervising employees with disabilities were not 
significantly more familiar with these accommodations than those who had not 
supervised any employees with disabilities.

When asked about continuing barriers to employment or advancement of people with 
disabilities, supervisors most often identified the lack of related experience or requisite 
skills and training on behalf of the individuals with disabilities, lack of supervisor 
knowledge of which accommodation to make, the workplace failing to provide an 
accommodation when needed, and attitudes and stereotypes towards people with 
disabilities. Interestingly, the perception of these barriers was not significantly different 
between supervisors with experience supervising employees with disabilities and 
supervisors without employees with disabilities.

Supervisors responding to this survey identified visible top management commitment and 
skills/training for employees with disabilities as the most effective means of reducing 
these remaining barriers to employment or advancement of people with disabilities.

Nine out of ten supervisors reported having had some formal disability civil rights 
training as a Federal supervisor, with approximately half of those who received training 
receiving between one and 15 hours of training. This training was most often provided as 
a part of general employment discrimination or diversity training, or of general 
supervisory/management training. Supervisors who had employees with disabilities were 
significantly more likely to have received training.

Respondents saw making disability employment a mandatory element of management 
training as the most effective incentive to encourage disability nondiscrimination related 
training.

Supervisors surveyed were asked which resources they most often used to help resolve 
issues. About a third reported using HR staff/employee relations, EEO Office, and safety 
and ergonomic staff, while the Job Accommodation Network (JAN), disabilities services 
office, and the selective placement coordinator were used by fewer than one in ten.

Approximately three of four supervisors reported that the following would be helpful in 
implementing the Technology Nondiscrimination requirements of Section 508: the 
technical staff within their agency (i.e. chief information officer/helpdesk), centralized 
technical assistance on technology accessibility issues, and training procurement 
specialists in Section 508 requirements.

When asked whether, in their opinion, office-based full time positions that they currently 
supervised could be relocated to home-based or other off-site facilities, approximately 
one-third of the white-collar supervisors reported that this was possible.

Respondents indicated that off-site technology support, guidelines for performance 
assessment of offsite workers, and formal flexplace agreements between off-site 
employees and supervisors would be helpful to them as a supervisor in creating or 
supporting homebased or off-site/flexplace/telecommuting employee positions.

Three out of five supervisors (60 percent) were unaware of the Federal initiative 
(Executive Order 13163) requiring the hiring of 100,000 qualified individuals with 
disabilities over the next five years. White collar supervisors and supervisors who had 
experience with employees with disabilities were more likely to be aware of this 
initiative. Of those reporting they were aware of this order, about two in five said that it 
had influenced their recruitment and hiring practices either “somewhat” or “a great deal.”

Two out of five supervisors surveyed reported being aware of the EEOC Guidelines for 
Federal agencies to establish written procedures to facilitate the provision of reasonable 
accommodation (Executive Order 13164). Nearly half of those aware of this provision 
indicated that it had influenced their supervisory practice either “a great deal” or 
“somewhat.” The level of awareness and influence was higher for those who had 
experience supervising employees with disabilities.

HR/EEO/Supervisor comparisons

HR/EEO respondents are more likely to have made accommodations to make interviews 
more accessible than are supervisors—not surprising given their position. However of 
those who made certain changes, supervisors were slightly more likely to rate “making 
interview locations more accessible” as easy or very easy than the HR/EEO respondents. 
Accommodations for people with visual or auditory disabilities were found to be more 
difficult for supervisors.

HR/EEO respondents were significantly more likely than supervisors to identify “costs of 
accommodations” and “supervisor knowledge of which accommodation to make” as 
being a barrier to the employment and advancement of employees with disabilities in 
their agencies.

Supervisors were slightly less likely to identify “lack of related experience” as a barrier 
than the HR/EEO respondents.

HR/EEO respondents were more than twice as likely than supervisors to identify 
coworker attitudes as being a barrier to the employment and advancement of employees 
with disabilities in their agencies.

Almost three out of four HR/EEO and supervisors said they were aware of their agency’s 
formal accommodation process.

Virtually all HR/EEO respondents were knowledgeable about their agency’s affirmative 
action goals, as were nine out of ten supervisors. Of those who were knowledgeable, the 
supervisors were more likely than the HR/EEO respondents to say their agency put a 
“great deal of effort” in setting and achieving them.

HR/EEO respondents were more likely to be aware of their agency’s return to work 
policy than the supervisors and were also more positive in their assessment of its benefits 
regarding: supervisor awareness of the accommodation process, recognition of 
confidentiality of the medical process, and in raising the acceptance of employees with 
disabilities. 

Summary of the Federal HR/EEO Survey

Agencies Report on Accommodation Policies and Practices for Employees

Agency HR/EEO representatives were asked a series of questions relating to their 
policies and practices in making accommodations for applicants and employees with 
disabilities. To get an index of annual volume of accommodation requests to surveyed 
Federal agencies, an initial question asked how many accommodation requests had been 
received in the Fiscal Year 1999 to date. Fifty-six percent reported that they had received 
ten or fewer accommodation requests, with slightly less than half of these (20 percent) 
reporting that they had received no such requests. Eleven percent reported more than ten 
but less than 100 requests for accommodations while 28 percent were not certain of how 
many requests had been made. Four percent reported more than 100 requests.

To meet the needs of employees with disabilities, all agencies reported having made 
some accommodations (see Table 1). Ninety-six percent reported that their agency had 
been flexible in the application of HR policies, made existing facilities accessible to 
employees with disabilities (94 percent), or modified the work environment (93 percent). 
Agencies were less likely to acquire or modify training materials (53 percent), or provide 
a job coach (48 percent). Agencies that had not made these accommodations reported 
they have not done so because they had never needed to.


Table 1
Accommodations Made for Employees With Disabilities

In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: 
 No, not able to (No); Never needed to make this accommodation (Never). 

Been flexible in its application of HR policies 
Yes: 96% 
No: Less than 1 percent 
Never: 3% 

Made existing facilities accessible to employees with disabilities (restrooms, door 
entrances, hallways, etc) 
Yes: 94% 
No: Less than 1 percent 
Never: 6% 

Modified work environment 
Yes: 93% 
No: Less than 1 percent 
Never: 7% 

Acquired or modified examination or training materials 
Yes: 92% 
No: Less than 1 percent 
Never: 7% 

Restructured jobs or modified work hours 
Yes: 88% 
No: Less than 1 percent 
Never: 11% 

Made parking or transportation accommodations 
Yes: 87% 
No: 2% 
Never: 11% 

Provided qualified readers or interpreters (including personal assistants) 
Yes: 80% 
No: 0% 
Never: 20% 

Provided written job instructions 
Yes: 76% 
No: 0% 
Never: 22% 

Changed supervisory methods 
Yes: 64% 
No: Less than 1 percent 
Never: 36% 

Made reassignment to vacant positions 
Yes: 62% 
No: 2% 
Never: 36% 

Acquired or modified training materials 
Yes: 53% 
No: 1% 
Never: 46% 

Provided a job coach 
Yes:48% 
No: 1% 
Never: 51% 

Note: Percent of all respondents (n=403) less “don’t know/refused” responses. 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

(End of Table 1)

Processing, Tracking, and Reporting Systems for Accommodations

Seventy-three percent of the HR/EEO respondents reported that their agency has a formal 
process for handling accommodation requests. In most cases, the immediate supervisor of 
the employee making the request is responsible for making the final decision regarding 
the provision of an accommodation (28 percent). Twenty-three percent of respondents 
said that some other party was responsible, and 17 percent named another manager or 
director as the decision-maker. In 16 percent of responding agencies, there is no single 
party responsible for making the final decision. The agency’s Equal Employment 
Opportunity (EEO) staff was identified as the final decision-makers in accommodation 
requests by eight percent of agency respondents.

Agencies Report on Accommodations for Applicants

Interviewees were asked how often their agency makes use of the provisions contained in 
Schedule A or B through which people with disabilities can be exempted from the 
competitive appointment process. One in four respondents (26 percent) reported 
frequently using such provisions. Approximately half (49 percent) of the respondents 
reported occasionally using these provisions for hiring persons with disabilities. The 
remainder of agency representatives responding reported never having used such 
provisions (12 percent), did not know whether they had been used (10 percent), or were 
not aware of the provisions (two percent).

Interviewees were asked how often the special hiring program for veterans with 
disabilities was used by their agency. Approximately one in four respondents (28 percent) 
reported frequently using this program. Fifty-two percent of respondents reported 
occasionally using this program. The remainder of agency representatives reported never 
having used such provisions, and eight percent were unsure.

Most respondents reported that making the needed pre-employment accommodations was 
easy. Most listed changes were rated as very easy or easy by more than three-quarters of 
respondents who had made the changes. For example, 89 percent of respondents felt that 
making new employee orientation accessible was easy, while similar percentages found 
making interview locations accessible (85 percent), and changing the wording of job 
applications (84 percent) easy. The area respondents reported as most difficult to change 
was making information accessible for a person with a visual or learning impairment, 
which was found to be difficult or very difficult by 15 percent of respondents, and was 
only rated as easy by 64 percent.

Familiarity with Civil Rights Considerations

HR/EEO respondents were given a list of ADA compliance considerations in the 
applicant interview process, and asked how familiar their agency’s interview staff are 
with each (see Table 2). More than four out of five respondents indicated that staff who 
perform interviews at their agency are familiar or very familiar with restrictions on 
eliciting information about medical issues (86 percent), knowing when to ask an 
applicant about how specific job tasks would be performed (85 percent), framing 
questions about the ability to perform job tasks (84 percent), and accessing sign language 
interpreters (80 percent).

Respondents indicated that their interview staff were least familiar with interview 
considerations relating to people with visual disabilities or people who are deaf or hard of 
hearing. Twenty-seven percent reported that their staff was unfamiliar or very unfamiliar 
with using a text telephone device (TTY) or relay service to set up interviews with deaf 
or hard of hearing applicants. Similarly, respondents reported their agency’s staff was 
less familiar with using a reader to assist a person with a visual impairment or learning 
disability (23 percent) or with adapting print materials used in interviews to large print, 
diskette, or Braille (20 percent).

Table 2
Familiarity with ADA Interview Considerations

In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: ADA Interview 
Considerations (Consideraton);
Familiar or very familiar (Familiar). 

Restrictions on eliciting information about medical issues affecting applicants' health and 
safety on the job 
Familiar: 86% 

Knowing when to ask an applicant about how s/he would perform specific job tasks 
Familiar: 85% 

Framing questions to applicants about the ability to perform specific job tasks rather than 
about disability 
Familiar: 84% 

Accessing sign language interpreters 
Familiar: 80% 

Restrictions on obtaining medical examinations and medical history information 
Familiar: 78% 

Knowing when to test for illegal drugs 
Familiar: 78% 

Using a reader to assist a person with a learning disability or visual impairment 
Familiar: 64% 

Adapting print materials used in the interview to large print, diskette, or Braille 
Familiar: 61% 

Using a text telelphone device (TTY) or relay service to set up interviews 
Familiar: 57% 

Note: Percent of all respondents (n=403) less “don’t know/refused” responses. 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

(End of Table 2)



Barriers to Employment for People with Disabilities and Ways to Overcome Them

The HR/EEO staff were presented with seven possible barriers to the employment or 
advancement of people with disabilities. No respondent indicated that there were no 
barriers for people with disabilities; all felt that one or more of the listed barriers were, in 
fact, a problem (see Chart 1). The major barriers were felt to be in the work environment 
or in the training or work experience of the person with a disability.

Respondents felt that there were significant barriers for people with disabilities in the 
work environment, such as attitudes and stereotypes about people with disabilities (45 
percent) and supervisors’ lack of knowledge about accommodations (34 percent). 
Respondents also identified barriers in the individuals with disabilities themselves, 
including a lack of related experience (56 percent) and lack of requisite skills and training 
(47 percent). Interestingly, cost of accommodations (19 percent), cost of training (12 
percent), and the additional cost of supervision (11 percent) were least often seen as 
barriers to employment for people with disabilities.

Chart 1

 Barriers to Employment or Advancement of Persons with Disabilities

Additional cost of supervision: 11%. 

Cost of training: 12%. 

Cost of accommodations: 19%. 

Supervisor knowledge of accommodations: 34%. 

Attitudes/stereotypes: 45%. 

Lack of requisite skills and training: 47%. 

Lack of related experience: 56%. 

Other: 28% 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

(End of Chart 1)

Respondents were then asked to rate the effectiveness of six means of reducing barriers to 
employment and advancement of people with disabilities. Visible top management 
commitment was cited by the most respondents as an effective or very effective means of 
barrier reduction (91 percent). Over two-thirds of respondents also felt that technical 
assistance (73 percent), staff training (72 percent), on-site consultation or special budget 
allocations (71 percent) could effectively reduce barriers at their agency. Fewer than half 
of respondents felt that short-term outside assistance would be effective (46 percent).

To help overcome barriers to the employment and advancement of people with 
disabilities, the majority of agencies made changes to organizational policies and 
practices (see Table 3). Agencies reported changing co-worker or supervisor attitudes 
towards employees with disabilities (93 percent), creating flexibility within the 
performance management system (86 percent), and modifying the return-to-work or 
transitional employment policies (84 percent). The majority of employers have also 
ensured equal pay and benefits for employees with disabilities (83 percent),changed leave 
policies (81 percent), or adjusted policies regarding medical questions and medical 
examinations (73 percent). Virtually all of those who did not make the change responded 
that they did not need to make the change, with less than two percent saying they “didn’t 
make this change.”

The change reported as most difficult was also the change most often made: changing co-
worker or supervisor attitudes towards employees with disabilities. Thirty-three percent 
of respondents rated this change as difficult or very difficult to make.

Table 3
Changes Made to Reduce Employment and Advancement Barriers

In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: Have needed to make 
this change
(Needed); Easy or very easy (Easy). 

Changing co-worker or supervisor attitudes towards employees with disabilities 
Needed: 93% 
Of the employers who made the change... 
Easy: 29% 

Creating flexibility within the performance management system 
Needed: 86% 
Of the employers who made the change... 
Easy: 65% 

Modifying the return to work or transitional employment policy 
Needed: 84% 
Of the employers who made the change... 
Easy: 64% 


Ensuring equal pay and benefits for employees with disabilities 
Needed: 83% 
Of the employers who made the change... 
Easy: 86% 

Change in leave policy 
Needed: 81% 
Of the employers who made the change... 
Easy: 72% 

Adjusting policies regarding medical questions and medical examinations of employees 
Needed: 73% 
Of the employers who made the change... 
Easy: 68% 

Note: Percent of all respondents (n=403) less “don’t know/refused” responses. 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

(End Table 3)


Agency Experience of Disability Discrimination Claims

HR/EEO respondents were presented with a list of eleven possible disability claims and 
asked which claims had been filed against their agency. Fifty percent reported that their 
agency had not had a claim filed in any of the categories. An additional 34 percent said 
they had experienced one to four of the listed claims, while 16 percent had claims filed 
against them in five or more of the possible areas.

Fewer than one out of ten of the respondents who were able to answer the claims 
questions (12-15 percent “didn’t know”) reported that their agencies had experienced 
claims of wage dispute (5 percent), denied or reduced benefits (6 percent), layoff (9 
percent), or failure to rehire (9 percent). The claim most commonly reported as having 
been experienced was the failure to provide a reasonable accommodation, reported by 41 
percent of the respondents. Thirty percent of respondents said their agency had 
experienced the claim of failure to promote.

Training Provided on Civil Rights-Related Topics

The survey asked the HR/EEO representatives if their agency’s employees had received 
training in 14 ADA, Rehabilitation Act, and Federal hiring-related areas (see Table 4). 
Fifty percent indicated that their employees had been trained in 10 or more areas. Not 
surprisingly, more than nine out of ten respondents reported that agency employees had 
been trained in non-discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices (93 percent). Similar 
percentages had also been trained in non-discrimination in the disciplinary or termination 
process (91 percent), and the accommodation process (90 percent). Respondents also 
reported high levels of training in Federal Hiring 18 Schedules (88 percent), the 
confidentiality of medical information (89 percent), and disability awareness or 
sensitivity training (88 percent).

If employees had received training in an area, respondents were also asked which 
employees at the agency had been trained. In all 14 areas, more than eight of ten agencies 
that had trained any staff had trained their human resources (HR) staff. The survey shows 
that much more training has been focused on HR and EEO staff, who are the persons 
responsible for employee hiring, dealing with employee issues and grievance handling. 
Far less training is offered to managerial and other staff.

Respondents were also asked whether they would like more information in each training 
area. Approximately two-thirds indicated that they would like more information on 
accommodation for mental disabilities (69 percent), and Rehabilitation Act requirements 
(66 percent). A similar percentage reported interest in receiving more information on 
available print or organizational resources, interaction with other employment legislation, 
and limitations and exclusions health plans are allowed to impose (64 percent for each).

Table 4

 Training on ADA and Rehabilitation Act-Related Topics

Non-discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 93% 
More Info? 
Yes: 55% 

Non-discrimination in the disciplinary process or termination 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 91% 
More Info? 
Yes: 55% 

The accommodation process 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes:90% 
More Info? 
Yes: 60% 

Federal Hiring schedules 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 89% 
More Info? 
Yes: 54% 

Confidentiality requirements of medical information 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 89% 
More Info? 
Yes: 55% 

Disability awareness or sensitivity training 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 88% 
More Info? 
Yes: 56% 

Equal access to promotional opportunities and training 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 83% 
More Info? 
Yes: 59% 

Defining essential job functions 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 83% 
More Info? 
Yes: 58% 

Conflict resolution in the accommodation process 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 81% 
More Info? 
Yes: 58% 

Rehabilitation Act requirements 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 80% 
More Info? 
Yes: 66% 

Accommodation for mental disabilities 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 65% 
More Info? 
Yes: 69% 

Available print or organizational resources to assist in the accommodation process 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 65% 
More Info? 
Yes: 64% 

The interaction with other state and federal employment legislation 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 60% 
More Info? 
Yes: 64% 

Limitations and exclusions the ADA and other Federal laws allow health plans to impose 
Have any of your employees been trained in this area? 
Yes: 46% 
More Info? 
Yes: 64% 

Note: Percent of all respondents (n=403) less “don’t know/refused” responses. 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

 (End Table 4)

Resources Used to Resolve Disability Discrimination and Accommodation Issues

Nine out of ten HR/EEO representatives reported that they use their agency’s EEO office 
as a resource to resolve disability discrimination or accommodation issues (see Table 5). 
Eighty-eight percent consult an internal legal counsel. Two-thirds or more turn to their 
agency’s safety/ergonomics staff (77 percent), state vocational rehabilitation agencies (74 
percent), or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) (69 percent) for 
assistance in resolving disability nondiscrimination or accommodation issues. Forty-nine 
percent use the President’s Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities Job 
Accommodation Network (JAN). Respondents were least likely to use external legal 
counsels (14 percent), their regional ADA Disability and Business Technical Assistance 
Center (23 percent), or local independent living centers or other disability organizations 
(43 percent).

Respondents were asked to rate the level of helpfulness each resource provided. The 
disability management/ benefits staff was considered the most helpful resource, with 86 
percent rating it “helpful” or “very helpful.” The agency’s EEO office and internal legal 
counsel received a similar rating (each 84 percent), as did safety/ergonomics staff (82 
percent), and the Job Accommodation Network (JAN) (74 percent). Fewer respondents 
reported that union representatives (43 percent) and local independent living centers or 
other organizations (55 percent) were helpful.

Table 5

Resources Used to Help Resolve Discrimination & Accommodation Issues

In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: Helpful or very 
helpful (Helpful). 

Your agency's EEO office 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 91% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 83% 

Internal legal counsel 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 88% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 84% 

Your safety/ergonomics staff 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 77% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 82% 

State vocational rehabilitation agencies 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 74% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 66% 

U.S. EEOC 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 69% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 60% 

Disability management/benefits staff 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 68% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 86% 

Other Federal agencies or professional society or business organization (e.g. SHRM, 
Chamber of Commerce) 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 63% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 81% 

Dispute resolution center/mediator 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 55% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 70% 

Union representative 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 52% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 43% 

Job Accommodation Network (toll-free number) 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 49% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 74% 

Local independent living centers or other disability organizations 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 43% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 55% 

The regional ADA Technical Assistance Center 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 23% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 71% 

External legal counsel 
Do you utilize? 
Yes: 14% 
Of those who utilize, how helpful is it? 
Helpful: 63% 

Note: Percent of all respondents (n=403) less “don’t know/refused” responses. 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

 (End Table 5)
 
Disability Management Programs and Disability Nondiscrimination and 
Accommodation

Disability management is a strategy that seeks to prevent disability from occurring in the 
workplace or, failing that, supports early intervention after the onset of a disability, in a 
way that promotes an organizational commitment to continued employment for 
employees with functional work limitation. The goal of disability management is 
successful job maintenance, or facilitation of prompt return to work, for people with 
disabilities. *4

 Sixty-six percent of respondents reported that their agency has a formal or informal 
disability management or return to work program; 42 percent reported having a formal 
program. Twenty-two percent said there was not a return-to-work program at their 
agency, and 12 percent were unsure. Respondents whose agencies have either formal or 
informal disability management programs indicated that these programs contribute to 
implementation of civil rights laws, by either somewhat or greatly raising awareness of 
the importance of medical confidentiality (89 percent), raising supervisor awareness of 
the accommodation process (88 percent), raising acceptance of employees with 
disabilities (88 percent), and providing an organizational structure for accommodations 
(79 percent).


Summary of the Federal Supervisor Survey

Supervisors Report on Accommodations for Applicants

Several survey questions dealt with inquiries about how involved supervisors were in the 
recruitment processes. Specifically, those surveyed were asked how many people they 
had hired in the past five years, how many of these were individuals with disabilities, and 
the extent to which the agency sets affirmative employment goals. In addition, 
supervisors were asked about their familiarity with particular hiring authorities for 
individuals with disabilities in the Federal government, as well as changes made to the 
applicant process to accommodate people with disabilities, and familiarity with applicant 
interviewing.

Supervisor Involvement in the Recruitment Process

Half of the supervisors reported being very or fairly involved in the recruitment process, 
with one-third (33 percent) saying they were “very involved.” When asked to what extent 
the supervisor’s Federal agency set reasonable affirmative employment goals and made 
an effort to achieve them, over half (51 percent) reported that their agency made a “great 
deal of effort,” with an additional 30 percent saying their agency had made “somewhat” 
of an effort on behalf of such goals.

When asked how many employees they had hired in the past five years (or since they 
became a Federal Supervisor, whichever was less), four out of five reported having hired 
at least one employee. Two out of five supervisors (41 percent) reported having hired one 
to five individuals, 17 percent hired six to ten, and one in ten (11 percent) had hired more 
than 20 individuals over that time period. Of those hiring, one in three (32 percent) 
reported having hired an individual with a disability, with one in ten having hired three or 
more individuals with disabilities during that time period.

Use of Special Hiring Authorities

Supervisors were asked about their familiarity with and the frequency of their use of 
special hiring authorities to facilitate recruitment and hiring of individuals with 
disabilities in the Federal workforce. More than one-half (56 percent) of those surveyed 
were “very” or “somewhat” familiar with the special provisions for hiring disabled 
veterans (this provision defines eligible veterans as those who are 30 percent disabled or 
more). However, fewer respondents were familiar with the provisions for hiring readers/ 
interpreters or other personal assistants for persons with disabilities (36 percent) or the 
special provision for hiring people with cognitive disabilities or people who have 
recovered from mental illness (30 percent).

Supervisors with experience supervising one or more employees with disabilities were 
much more likely to report being very familiar with each of the special hiring authorities 
and more likely to have used them when familiar, compared to those without experience 
supervising employees with disabilities. There is an interesting continuum in the degree 
of familiarity with these authorities, from those not supervising employees with 
disabilities, supervising one or two employees with a disability, and supervising three or 
more employees with disabilities. As experience with the supervision of a person with a 
disability increases, so does familiarity with the Federal hiring authorities (see Chart 2).

Chart 2 

Supervisors “Very Familiar” with Federal Hiring Authorities, by Number of Employees 
with Disabilities Supervised 

Awareness of hiring authorities for hiring people with cognitive disabilities, significant 
physical disabilities, or people who have recovered from mental illness 
Supervisors with no employees with disabilities: 3%
Supervisors with 1 or 2 employees with disabilities: 7%
Supervisors with 3 or more employees with disabilities: 16%

For hiring readers/ interpreters and other personal assistants for employees with 
disabilities 
No employees with disabilities: 6%
1 or 2 employees with disabilities: 12%
3 or more employees with disabilities: 29%

For hiring disabled veterans (30% disabled or more) 
No employees with disabilities: 17%
1 or 2 employees with disabilities: 27%
3 or more employees with disabilities: 48%

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Chart 2

Pre-Employment Accommodations Made

Those surveyed were asked about the changes they had made for recruitment and pre-
employment screening processes across four different types of accommodations, 
including changing questions asked in interviews, making information accessible for a 
person with a visual or learning impairment, making information accessible for a hearing-
impaired person, and making interview locations accessible to people with physical 
disabilities (mobility impairments).

Making information accessible for a person with a visual or learning impairment was 
most difficult, being reported as difficult or very difficult by approximately one in four 
respondents (24 percent). Making informa- tion accessible for a person with a hearing 
impairment was also seen as difficult, reported as difficult or very difficult by 17 percent 
of respondents with experience in making such changes.

Familiarity with Interview Considerations and Accommodations

Respondents were given a list of considerations in the applicant interview process, and 
asked how familiar they were with each (see Table 6). Almost three-quarters of the 
respondents reported being familiar or very familiar with framing questions to applicants 
about the ability to perform specific job tasks rather than about disability (72 percent), 
and knowing when to ask an applicant about how she or he would perform specific job 
tasks (71 percent). The areas where respondents indicated the least familiarity were in 
accommodating individuals with visual or hearing impairments, such as accessing sign 
language interpreters, using a tele-typewriter (TTY) or relay service to set up interviews, 
adapting print materials used in the interview (to large print, diskette or Braille), or using 
a reader to assist a person with a learning disability or visual impairment. Another area in 
which there was a higher degree of unfamiliarity was in knowing when to test for illegal 
drugs, reported by approximately two out of five supervisors (44 percent). Supervisors 
who had employees with disabilities were significantly more familiar (by ten percent or 
more) than those without experience with each of the applicant interviewing issues, 
except for “knowing when to test for illegal drugs.”

Table 6: 
Familiarity with Disability Employment Discrimination (ADA) Interview Considerations 
and Accommodations 

 In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: Familiar or very 
familiar (familiar), Neither familiar or unfamiliar (Neither); Unfamiliar or Very 
Unfamiliar (Unfamiliar).

Framing questions to applicants about the ability to perform specific job tasks rather than 
about disability 
Familiar: 72%
Neither: 12%
Unfamiliar: 16 %

Knowing when to ask an applicant about how s/ he would perform specific job tasks.
Familiar: 71%
Neither: 13%
Unfamiliar: 16%

Restrictions on eliciting information about medical issues affecting applicant's health and 
safety on the job. 
Familiar: 65%
Neither: 13%
Unfamiliar: 21%
 
Restrictions on obtaining medical examinations and medical history information.
Familiar: 60%
Neither: 12%
Unfamiliar: 29%
 
Accessing sign language interpreters.
Familiar: 49%
Neither: 13%
Unfamiliar: 37%

Knowing when to test for illegal drugs.
Familiar: 43%
Neither: 13%
Unfamiliar: 44% 

Using a teletypewriter (TTY) or relay service to set up interviews.
Familiar: 38%
Neither: 11%
Unfamialiar: 50%
 
Adapting print materials used in the interview to large print, diskette, or Braille,
Familiar: 36%
Neither: 14%
Unfamiliar: 50%
 
Using a reader to assist a person with a learning disability or visual impairment.
Familiar: 35%
Neither: 14%
Unfamiliar: 51% 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused" 
(5% or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 6


Supervisors Report on Accommodation Practices

Federal supervisors surveyed were asked a series of questions relating to their practices in 
making accom- 22 modations for applicants and employees with disabilities. More than 
three-quarters (78 percent) reported that their agency had a formal process for handling 
accommodation requests. When asked who makes the final decision on the provision of 
an accommodation, the most common response was that the respondent as the supervisor, 
in consultation with his/her immediate supervisor, made this decision (29 percent). One 
out of five respondents indicated that they, as the immediate supervisor of the employee, 
made the decision (21 percent), or another manager or director did so (20 percent). Least 
often making the final decision on the provision of an accommodation (two percent of 
respondents or less) was the Disability Service Office, occupational safety/medical clinic 
staff, safety/ergonomic staff, the agency’s Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) staff, 
legal counsel (internal or external), or disability management/ benefits staff. Supervisors 
with experience supervising one or more employees with disabilities were twice as likely 
to report that they, as the immediate supervisor, made/would make the final 
accommodation decision, as those without experience (26 percent compared to 13 
percent). Those without such experience were more likely to say the final decision would 
fall to another manager/director (25 percent compared to 17 percent).

Supervisor Experience Making Accommodations

To get a sense of the number of accommodation requests made to the supervisors 
surveyed, an initial question asked how many accommodation requests had been received 
by the supervisors responding to the survey over the past five years (or their tenure as a 
Federal supervisor, whichever was less). In terms of their own experience in dealing 
directly with accommodation requests, half (50 percent) of the supervisors had received 
at least one accommodation request over the past five years. Slightly over a third (36 per- 
cent) had received one to three requests, one in ten (11 percent) had received four to ten 
requests, and only four percent received more than ten requests. Six supervisors reported 
receiving over 40 requests, which were often multiple accommodations for a single 
individual (e.g. sign language interpreters at each staff meeting for a deaf employee).

Three out of five supervisors (60 percent) reported supervising employees with 
disabilities during the last five years. Specifically, 40 percent reported supervising one or 
two employees with disabilities, 11 percent reported three or four, with the remaining 
nine percent reporting five or more employees with disabilities (40 percent reported no 
employees with disabilities). Overall, nearly two thirds (64 percent) of the supervisors 
surveyed had supervised at least one employee with a disability and/or had received at 
least one accommodation request over the past five years or their tenure as a Federal 
supervisor (whichever was less).

Supervisors were also asked which types of people with disabilities they supervised, 
classifying the disabilities according to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) targeted disability categories.  *5 Over half (56 percent) had supervised at least 
one employee with an EEOC targeted disability.

Kinds of Accommodations Made

Respondents were asked if they or their agency had made accommodations for an 
employee they supervised. Three quarters of the respondents indicated that at least one 
accommodation had been made for an employee they supervised. It is interesting to note 
that this is a higher proportion than those reporting receiving accommodation requests 
(50 percent). This difference may be due to the fact that these accommodation questions 
were not limited to the past five years and also include accommodations made without 
the employee making a request. Nearly half of all supervisors surveyed (49 percent), 
showed considerable breadth of experience, having made four or more different types of 
accommodations of the 11 asked about in the survey (see Table 7). The only individual 
accommodation that was made by over half the supervisors (53 percent) was that of 
advocating to make existing facilities accessible to employees with disabilities, such as 
restrooms, door entrances, hallways, etc. Almost half (48 percent) of the responding 
supervisors reported modifying a work environment (such as by purchasing an orthopedic 
chair, lowering a desk, etc.). Fewer than one in five supervisors reported making the 
accommodations of providing a job coach, or reassignment to vacant positions (each by 
17 percent of respondents). The vast majority of those supervisors who had not made a 
specific accommodation responded they did not do so because they “never needed to.” 
Typically, less than one percent of the supervisors reported they were “not able to” 
provide an accommodation, with two percent reporting being unable to provide 
“reassignment to vacant positions.”

Table 7: 
Accommodations Made for Employees With Disabilities 

In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: Yes, made this 
accommodation (yes); No, not able to make this accommodation (No); Never needed to 
make this accommodation (Never).

Advocated to make existing facilities accessible to employees with disabilities 
(restrooms, door entrances, hallways, etc) 
Yes: 53%
No: Less than 1%
Never: 47%
 
Modified work environment (orthopedic chair, lower desk, etc.):
Yes: 48%
No: Less than 1%
Never: 52%
 
Acquired or modified equipment or devices
Yes: 47%
No: Less than 1%
Never: 52%
 
Restructured jobs or modified work hours
Yes: 45%
No: Less than 1% 
Never: 54%
 
Made parking or transportation accommodations 
Yes: 41%
No: Less than 1%
Never: 58%
 
Provided written job instructions
Yes:  31%
No: Less than 1%
Never: 69%

Changed supervisory methods 
Yes: 29%
No: Less than 1%
Never: 70 %

Provided qualified readers or interpreters (including personal assistants) 
Yes: 27%
No: Less than 1%
Never: 73%
 
Acquired or modified training materials
Yes:  20%
No: Less than 1%
Never: 79%

Made reassignment to vacant positions 
Yes: 17%
No: 2%
Never:  81%
 
Provided a job coach
Yes: 17%
No; Less than 1%
Never: 82% 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused"( 
5% or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 7



 Accommodation Resources Used and Found Helpful

Supervisors were asked about their use of 14 specific accommodation resources. Nearly 
three out of five had used at least one of these 14 resources. The majority of those who 
used resources utilized multiple sources, with 36 percent reporting having used one or 
two, 34 percent used three or four, and 31 percent used five or more of the 14 resources. 
The most commonly used resources included the Human Resource personnel at the 
central (30 percent) and servicing/subagency level (28 percent), as well as the employee 
assistance program (30 percent) and the safety/ergonomics staff (28 percent) (see Table 
8).

If a resource was not used, three options were available: “not aware of,” “aware but not 
needed” and “aware but not helpful.” “Aware but not helpful” was reported by fewer than 
one percent of respondents. Of special interest is that nearly half (42-48 percent) of the 
supervisors were not aware of the following resources: the Job Accommodation Network 
(JAN), disabilities services office (e.g., CAP, COAST, TARGET center), disabled 
employee advisory groups, and selective placement coordinators. Interestingly, 
supervisors with experience supervising employees with disabilities were not 
significantly more familiar with these accommodations than those who had not 
supervised any employees with disabilities. However, they were more aware than those 
without experience of the following resources: Independent Living Centers (87 percent 
compared to 79 percent), State Vocational Rehabilitation agencies (85 percent compared 
to 78 percent), and external health care providers (87 percent compared to 81 percent) as 
resources.

Table 8

Resources Used for Accommodation Assistance 

In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: Used this resource 
(used); Not used because not aware of this resource (not aware); not used because this 
resource was not needed (not needed); For those who used it, was it helpful? (% Helpful).


Central human resource personnel (Department wide) 
Used: 30%
Not aware:  15% 
Not needed: 56%
If used, helpful? 79% 

Employee Assistance Program
 Used: 30% 
Not aware: 4% 
Not needed: 67%
Helpful? 74%
 
Servicing human resource personnel (sub-agency or unit level)
Used:  28%
Not aware:  18%
Not needed: 54%
Helpful? 83%
 
Safety/ ergonomic staff
Used:  28%
Not aware:  19%
Not needed: 53%
Helpful?  84%

EEO office
 Used: 23% 
Not aware: 5%
Not needed:  73%
Helpful? 75%
 
Occupational health/ medical clinic staff
Used: 22%
Not aware:  16% 
Not needed: 62%
Helpful? 83%
 
Disability management/ benefits staff
Used: 14%
Not aware: 32%
Not needed: 54%
Helpful? 83%
 
External health care provider
Used: 13%
Not aware: 16%
Not needed: 70% 
Helpful? 57%
 
State vocational rehabilitation agencies
Used:  9%
Not aware: 16%
Not needed: 74%
Helpful? 81%
 
Disabilities Services Office (i. e. CAP, COAST, TARGET Center) 
Used: 8%
Not aware: 48%
Not needed: 44%
Helpful? 83%
 
Disabled Employee Advisory Group
Used: 6%
Not aware: 46%
Not needed:  48%
Helpful?  84%
 
Local independent living centers or other disability organizations 
Used: 5%
Not aware:  18%
Not needed: 77%
Helpful? 74%
 
Selective Placement Coordinator 
Used: 5%
Not aware: 42%
Not needed: 53%
Helpful? 81%
 
Job Accommodation Network (toll-free number) 
Used: 3%
Not aware:  47%
Not needed: 50%
Helpful? 83% 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001 less responses of "don't know/ refused" (5% 
or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 
Helpfulness rated on a 1-5 scale with 1 being very helpful and 5= not at all helpful  
(Helpful= 1,2 Undecided= 3 Not Helpful= 4,5.) 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 8

Opportunities for Promotion/Training for People with Disabilities

Supervisors were asked what they saw as the continuing barriers to the hiring and 
advancement of people with disabilities, and ways to address these barriers. In addition, 
they were asked about the various means they used to facilitate access to training and 
other benefits of employment for employees with disabilities.

Barriers to Hiring and Promotion of People with Disabilities

Respondents were presented with seven possible barriers to the employment and 
advancement of people with disabilities. No respondent indicated that there were no 
barriers for people with disabilities; all felt that one or more of the listed barriers were in 
fact a problem (See Chart 3). The most frequently noted barriers were felt to be in the 
work environment or in the training or work experience of the person with the disability.

Respondents indicated that there were significant barriers for people with disabilities in 
the work environment, including a supervisor’s knowledge of which accommodations to 
make (23 percent), accommodations not being provided when needed (21 percent), and 
attitudes and stereotypes about people with disabilities (20 percent). Respondents also 
identified barriers that result from inadequacies in the preparation for employment of the 
individual with a disability. These potential barriers to employment and advancement 
were a lack of related experience in the person with a disability (48 percent) and a lack of 
requisite skills and training in the person with a disability (43 percent). Interestingly, cost 
of accommodations (11 percent), additional cost of supervision (10 percent), and the cost 
of training (8 percent) were least likely to be seen as remaining barriers to employment 
for people with disabilities. Surprisingly, the perception of these barriers was not 
significantly different between supervisors with experience supervising employees with 
disabilities and supervisors without employees with disabilities.

Chart 3
Barriers to Employment or Advancement of People with Disabilities 

Numbers after each barrier are percent of supervisors who indicated this specific option 
was a barrier to employment or advancement for people with disabilities.

Cost of training: 8%
Additional cost of surpervision:10% 
Cost of accommodations 11% 
Lack of established policy/ procedures 17% 
Additional travel costs 17% 
Attitudes/ stereotypes 20% 
Accommodation not provided when needed 21% 
A supervisor's knowledge of which accommodation to make 23% 
Lack of requisite skills and training (of the person with a disability) 43% 
Lack of related experience ( of the person with a disability) 48% 
Other 15% 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused" 
(5% or less of total responses). 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 


End of Chart 3


Possible Ways to Reduce Barriers in the Workplace

Supervisors were also asked their perceptions of the degree of effectiveness of eleven 
different items in reducing barriers to employment or advancement for persons with 
disabilities within their respective agencies (See Table 9). The majority (over 50 percent) 
reported all eleven items would be effective (rated as 1 or 2 on a five point scale where 1 
is “very effective” and 5 is “very ineffective”). More than four out of five supervisors 
reported that visible top management commitment (85 percent) and skills training for 
employees with disabilities (83 percent) would be effective means of barrier reduction. 
Other means considered highly effective include mentoring (78 percent), staff training 
(76 percent), and on-site consultation or technical assistance (76 percent).

Table 9
Means to Reduce Barriers to Employment 

The number after each possible means of barrier reduction is the percent of supervisors 
considering it effective

Visible top management commitment
Effective: 85% 

Skills training for employees with disabilities
Effective: 83% 

Mentoring
Effective: 78% 

Staff training
Effective: 76% 

On-site consultation or technical assistance
Effective: 76% 

Changing co-worker/ supervisor attitudes towards persons with disabilities
Effective: 69% 

Special budget allocation/ centralized accommodation fund
Effective: 67%

Development and input from a disability advisory group 
Effective: 62% 

Include affirmative action and accommodation items for persons with disabilities 
in supervisor performance appraisals
Effective: 60% 

Departmental reward/ recognition (i.e. A certificate acknowledging outstanding 
performance)
Effective: 59% 

Short-term outside assistance with job supervision (e. g. outside job coach)
Effective: 57% 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused" 
(5% or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 
Effectiveness rated 1= Very effective to 5= Very ineffective 
% Effective= 1 & 2. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 9


Supervisors were also asked if they had used any of three items (wheelchair access, 
communication access for those with vision impairments, and communication access for 
those with hearing impairments) to ensure that people with disabilities they supervised 
would have access to meetings, promotional and social opportunities. The most often 
used was wheelchair access, with three of five respondents (61 percent) indicating use of 
this. Less frequently reported was communication access for the deaf or hard of hearing 
(45 percent), and communication access for persons with visual or learning disabilities 
(38 percent).

Supervisor Experience in Resolving Disability Discrimination Issues

Approaches and Resources Used to Resolve Accommodation Disputes

Supervisors were presented with five possible resources or approaches to dealing with an 
accommodation dispute, should one arise, and asked how easy or dif- ficult using this 
approach would be for them. The five resources or approaches presented were as follows: 
discussing accommodation needs with the individual; accessing a resource person to help 
with accommodation issues (HR personnel, EEO personnel, health and safety personnel, 
ergonomics personnel, Employee Relations personnel, etc.); having access to a person 
trained in alternative dispute resolution (ADR); effectively using the existing 
dispute/complaint resolution process; getting sufficient training on dispute resolution 
approaches; and determining the most appropriate dispute resolution process. 
Approximately three-quarters or more of the individuals reported that using each 
accommodation dispute approach or resource would be easy. Discussing accommodation 
needs with the individual with a disability was seen as the least difficult approach to use, 
with nine out of ten of respondents (92 percent) seeing this as easy to do. Determining the 
most appropriate dispute resolution process was seen as modestly more difficult, with 
approximately three out of four (73 percent) respondents seeing this as an easy approach 
to resolving an accommodation dispute, should one arise.

The supervisors were also presented with 12 possible resources that could be used to help 
resolve disability employment civil rights issues (see Table 10). Less than half of the 
respondents used any single resource for these purposes. The resources used by the 
largest number of supervisors included: the HR Staff/Employee Relations (44 percent), 
the agency’s Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Office (33 percent), and the 
agency’s safety/ergonomics staff (33 percent).

Table 10
Resources Used to Help Resolve ADA Issues 

In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: Percentage of 
supervisors who utilize this resource (Used); Percentage of those who used this resource 
who found it helpful or very helpful (helpful). 

HR Staff/ Employee Relations 
Used: 44% 
Helpful: 82% 

Your agency's EEO office
Used: 33%
Helpful: 77%
 
Your safety/ ergonomics staff 
Used: 33%
 Helpful: 85 %

Union representative 
Used:25% 
Helpful: 60%

Agency legal counsel
Used: 23%
Helpful: 85%
 
Disability management/ benefits staff 
Used: 19%
Helpful:  78% 

State Vocational Rehabilitation agencies, DBTACs, ILCs, other disability organizations 
Used: 16% 
Helpful: 88% 

U. S. EEOC 
Used: 16%
Helpful:  78%
 
Other Federal agencies or professional society or business agency (eg OPM, MSPB, 
SHRM, IPMA)
Used:  14%
Helpful:  81%
 
Dispute resolution center/ mediator 
Used: 11%
Helpful: 71%
 
Disabilities Services Office
Used:  8%
Helpful:  79% 

Selective Placement Coordinator 
Used: 8%
Helpful: 77% 
Job Accommodation Network (toll-free number) 4 83 

Note: Percent of all valid responses; n= 1001, less responses of "don't know/ refused" 
(5% or less of total responses). 
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 10

Training on Civil Rights Related Topics

Disability Civil Rights Training Received

More than nine out of ten supervisors (92 percent) were trained in at least one of the 
eleven disability employment civil rights training areas asked about, and more than half 
had received training in eight of the eleven topics (see Table 11). The topics most often 
reported as the focus of training (by two-thirds to three-quarters of respondents) were 
non-discrimination in the disciplinary process or termination (72 percent), non-
discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices (71 percent), and disability awareness 
and/or sensitivity training (71 percent). The three areas in which supervisors had received 
comparatively less training were Section 508 training (28 percent), the special 
appointing/hiring authorities (26 percent), and accommodation for persons with mental or 
psychiatric disabilities (25 percent).

Table 11
Training on ADA and Rehabilitation  Act-Related Topics 

Non-discrimination in the disciplinary process or termination 
Received Training on this topic: 72%
More information on this topic? 43%

Non-discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices 
Received Training on this topic: 71%
More information on this topic? 48%

Disability awareness and/ or sensitivity training 
Received Training on this topic: 71%
More information on this topic? 45%

Confidentiality requirements of medical information 
Received Training on this topic: 67%
More information on this topic? 42%

Equal access in promotional opportunities & training 
Received Training on this topic: 60%
More information on this topic? 51%

Conflict resolution in the accommodation process 
Received Training on this topic: 57%
More information on this topic? 50%

The accommodation process 
Received Training on this topic:  55%
More information on this topic? 58%

Defining essential job functions 
Received Training on this topic: 53%
More information on this topic? 49%

Section 508 training 
Received Training on this topic: 28
More information on this topic? 57

The special appointing/ hiring authorities 
Received Training on this topic: 26%
More information on this topic? 64%

Accommodation for mental disabilities 
Received Training on this topic: 25%
More information on this topic? 63%

Note: Percent of all valid responses (n= 1001) less responses of "don't know/ refused"( 
5% or less of total responses).  Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 11

Approximately four in five supervisors reported that the training on ADA and 
Rehabilitation Act topics they received as a Federal supervisor was provided as a part of 
a general supervisory/management (87 percent) or employment discrimination or 
diversity training (83 percent). The next most commonly cited ways training had been 
provided were as a specialized focus on disability provided by Federal government staff 
experts (64 percent), or as a specialized focus on disability by an external consultant (41 
percent). Supervisors of employees with disabilities were more likely to have received 
training from Federal Government staff experts (68 percent compared to 58 percent) and 
from external consultants (44 percent compared to 36 percent), than those who had not 
had experience with employees with disabilities.

The topics on which the majority of supervisors (50 percent or more) indicated wanting 
more information were as follows (in descending order of interest): special 
appointing/hiring authorities, accommodations for persons with mental or psychiatric 
disabilities, the accommodation process, Section 508 training, and equal access in 
promotional opportunities and training.

Incentives to Encourage Disability-Related Training

The supervisors were asked how effective certain specific incentives would be in 
encouraging attendance at disability nondiscrimination related training (including 
Americans with Disabilities Act topics, disability employment, Rehabilitation Act, EEOC 
Guidance, and Section 508 compliance). The incentive seen as most effective was 
making ADA/disability employment a mandatory element of management training, 
selected by almost four out of five respondents (79 percent). The next most often selected 
incentives were paying ADA training costs (66 percent), and making ADA training 
available on the Internet (56 percent). Departmental reward or recognition for receiving 
training was seen as the least effective of the four alternatives, but still seen as effective 
by over two out of five respondents (44 percent marked it as effective).

Accommodation Informational and Organizational Resources Used

Those surveyed were also asked about the resources that they used to address disability 
civil rights-related issues, across seven alternatives, including: print or video materials, 
on-site consultation/training, web sites/listservs/EEOC homepage, organizational 
newsletters, telephone consultation/information hotlines, government-sponsored 
programs (i.e. IDEAS, FOSE), and employee-sponsored disability organizations in the 
supervisor’s department or agency. The resources reported most often used were video 
materials (reported as used by 42 percent of respondents) and on-site 
consultation/training (34 percent). Web sites/ listservs/EEOC homepage, organizational 
newsletters, telephone consultation/information hotlines were used by approximately one 
in five respondents. Leastoften used were government-sponsored programs (17 percent) 
and employee-sponsored disability organizations (13 percent). The lack of use of these 
particular resources may have been a function of lack of awareness of them, as at least 
one in three respondents indicated that they were not aware of these resources.

Disability Management and Workplace Accommodation

Fifty-four percent of respondents reported that their agency has a formal disability 
management or return to work program (with written policies and procedures), with an 
additional 12 percent having an informal program.

Respondents whose agencies have either formal or informal disability management 
programs indicated that these programs contribute “a great deal” to implementation of 
disability nondiscrimination or civil rights laws, by either raising awareness of the 
importance of medical confidentiality (60 percent), raising acceptance of employees with 
disabilities (39 percent), raising supervisor awareness of the accommodation process (36 
percent), or providing an organizational structure for accommodations (31 percent).

Awareness of and Implementation to Date of Presidential Orders

Supervisors were queried about their perceptions of implementation to date of several 
Presidential Orders that relate to more effective recruitment and retention for individuals 
with disabilities in the Federal workforce. Inquiry was also made about other services and 
supports that would facilitate effective implementation of these equal employment 
opportunity provisions.

Implementation of Section 508

Section 508 requires that electronic and information technology developed, procured, 
maintained, or used by the Federal government be accessible to people with disabilities. 
*6 The Center for Information Technology Accommodation (CITA) in the U.S. General 
Services Administration’s Office of Government-wide Policy has been charged with the 
task of educating Federal employees and building the infrastructure necessary to support 
Section 508 implementation.

Those surveyed were asked how helpful each of five possible resources or services might 
be to them as supervisors in implementing the technology nondiscrimination 
requirements of Section 508. The five resources were as follows: centralized technology 
procurement that screens for these criteria, training procurement specialists in Section 
508 requirements, centralized technical assistance on technology accessibility issues, unit 
specific expertise/technical assistance on technology accessibility issues, and access to 
the technical staff within the supervisor’s agency (i.e. Chief Information Officer 
(CIO)/Help Desk). All of these items were perceived as helpful by at least seven out of 
ten respondents. Those items seen as most helpful were access to the technical assistance 
staff within the given supervisor’s agency (79 percent), centralized technical assistance 
on technology accessibility issues (77 percent), and training procurement specialists in 
Section 508 requirements (76 percent).

Off-site/Telework for Federal Employees with Disabilities

Another Executive Order deals with the identification or development of home-based, 
off-site, or telework opportunities for individuals with disabilities in the Federal 
workforce. This survey has afforded an opportunity to explore the potential of this 
initiative and its ease of implementation from the supervisors’ perspective. Specifically, 
supervisors were asked if they currently had any full-time employees who worked 
primarily from home or from another off-site location, and whether any of the existing 
office-based positions that they currently supervise could be relocated to home-based or 
other off-site facilities, either on a full-time basis or split between home and office-based 
location in a given week. In addition, these supervisors were asked how easy or difficult 
it would be for them to develop full-time positions that would be performed either 
exclusively at home or split between home and on-site locations.

Survey respondents were asked about their awareness of the Federal initiative regarding 
telecommuting/ telework for individuals for significant disabilities. Nearly 40 percent 
were aware of this provision. Supervisors who had experience supervising disabled 
employees were more likely to report awareness of this initiative (42 percent), compared 
to those without experience (32 percent). Overall, thirteen percent of the respondents 
indicated they currently supervise full-time employees who work primarily from home or 
another off-site location.

These supervisors were also asked whether, in their opinion, any of the office-based 
positions that they currently supervise could be relocated to home-based or other off-site 
facilities, either on a full-time basis or split between home and office-based locations in a 
given week. Approximately three out of five (58 percent) respondents indicated that they 
would be able, in their opinion, to take positions that they currently supervised and split 
them between home or off-site and in-office functions during a given week. Supervisors 
said that split time between off-site and on-site positions was more feasible than full-time 
off site, with only one in three supervisors (32 percent) responding affirmatively to the 
full-time option. Supervisors of employees with disabilities were more likely to say they 
would be able to make current positions home-based (37 percent compared to 25 percent) 
or split home-office positions (64 percent compared to 50 percent) and develop new 
positions more easily.

Supervisors were also asked how easy or difficult it would be to develop such positions. 
Again, respondents indicated that developing jobs that were split between home and 
office would be easier than trying to create full-time off-site positions (32 percent saying 
very easy/easy for split time, compared to 14 percent for full-time at home). Supervisors 
with employees with disabilities were also more likely to view developing positions to 
work at home as easier, than those who were not supervising an employee with a 
disability.

An effort was also made in this survey to identify which structures and supports might 
best facilitate the redesign of existing positions or creation of new ones that could be 
home-based or telework employment opportunities for people with disabilities. 
Specifically, those who indicated they had potential positions (79 percent of the 1,001 
supervisors surveyed) were asked to make a judgment about the degree of helpfulness of 
seven different possible supports to supervision of telework employees, as follows: off-
site technology support; guidelines for performance assessment of offsite workers; formal 
flexiplace agreement between offsite employee and supervisor; training for supervisors of 
off-site workers; initial and ongoing training for off-site workers; having guidelines for 
the design of off-site work; guidelines for supervision of off-site workers; and training for 
coworkers of off-site workers.

In general, the majority of supervisors (57 percent or more) rated all of these possible 
structures or supports for off-site work as helpful (see Table 12). The three rated as most 
helpful were off-site technology support (75 percent), guidelines for performance 
assessment of off-site workers (71 percent), and formal flexiplace agreements between 
off-site employees and supervisors (71 percent).

Table 12

Helpfulness of resources in supporting home-based or telework employment 
opportunities
Helpfulness was rated on a 1-5 scale with 1= very helpful and 5= not at all helpful 
Helpful= 1,2. 

Off-site technology support
Helpful: 75% 

Guidelines for performance assessment of off-site workers 
Helpful: 71%

Formal flexiplace agreement between off-site employee and supervisor 
Helpful: 71%

Training for supervisors of off-site workers
Helpful: 66%

Initial and ongoing training for off-site workers
Helpful: 66%

Guidelines for the design of off-site work:
Helpful: 66%

Guidelines for supervision of off-site workers
Helpful: 65%

Training for coworkers of off-site workers 
Helpful: 57%

Note: Percent of all valid responses (n= 1001) less responses of "don't know/ refused"( 
5% or less of total responses).  Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. 

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

End of Table 12


The survey respondents were also asked about how easy or difficult it would be to 
accommodate an individual with a chronic illness or disability (for example, someone 
who has cancer treatment, physical therapy, dialysis, or a mobility impairment) with the 
ability to work at home for one to two days each week or intermittently. As expected, 
supervisors who had experience with employees with disabilities viewed making this 
accommodation as easier than those who were inexperienced (44 percent said it would be 
very easy/ easy compared to 32 percent of those not supervising an employee with a 
disability).

Awareness and Implementation of Federal Government Hiring Executive Order

Two questions were asked of supervisors to find out more about their awareness and 
current agency implementation of Executive Order 13163, which requires the Federal 
government to hire 100,000 qualified individuals with disabilities over the next five 
years. Almost two in five (38 percent) indicated an awareness of the Executive Order.

Those surveyed were also asked to what extent their agency’s plan to implement this 
executive order has influenced their recruitment and hiring practices to date. Of those 
who indicated that they were aware of the order at all (n= 329), again approximately two 
in five (38 percent) indicated that this had influenced their hiring decisions a great deal or 
somewhat. Supervisors with experience supervising employees with disabilities were 
more aware of this order (43 percent compared to 30 percent) and also more likely to say 
it had an impact on their hiring decisions (43 percent compared to 25 percent), than those 
without any employees with disabilities.

Awareness and Implementation of Executive Order to Establish Written Accommodation 
Procedures

Several survey items dealt with supervisor awareness of and also the influence on 
supervisory practice of the EEOC Guidelines for Federal agencies to implement 
Executive Order 13164, establishing written procedures to facilitate the provision of 
reasonable accommodation. This requires that each Federal agency establish effective 
written procedures for processing requests for reasonable accommodation by employees 
and applicants with disabilities. Similar to their awareness of the Federal government 
hiring initiative discussed above, two out of five supervisors (41 percent), reported 
awareness of these EEOC guidelines requiring agencies to develop a written 
accommodation procedure. Nearly half (47 percent) of respondents aware of this 
provision indicated that it had influenced their supervisory practices “a great deal or 
somewhat.” Again, supervisors with experience with employees with disabilities were 
more likely to be aware of these guidelines (46 percent compared to 34 percent) and 
reported that it had a greater influence on their practices (55 percent compared to 29 
percent) than those who did not supervise employees with disabilities.




Comparison of Selected Survey Items

Certain questions asked in both the HR/EEO survey and the supervisor survey were 
compared. Not all parallel questions were compared, due to differences between the 
groups in their experience of and exposure to issues related to working with employees 
and applicants with disabilities. Therefore, the primary focus of the comparisons was the 
responses to the attitude and knowledge questions.

It should be noted that the HR/EEO sample is comprised of 97 Federal agencies, whereas 
the supervisor sample is drawn solely from the 17 Task Force Member Agencies. 
Because of this, the supervisor sample was compared to both the HR/EEO sample in its 
entirety as well as the subset of only HR/EEO respondents from Task Force member 
agencies. Although the numbers changed slightly, all statistically significant differences 
remained significant. Therefore the results here describe a comparison between the full 
HR/EEO sample from all 97 agencies with the supervisor sample drawn from the 17 
PTFEAD agencies.

Nearly three quarters of both groups said their agency had a formal process for handling 
accommodation requests (73 percent of HR/EEO and 78 percent of supervisors). Given 
that supervisors would not be dealing with accommodations as frequently as HR/ EEO, it 
is very encouraging that such a large proportion reported awareness of such a process. 
This awareness may reflect changes due to the EEOC guidelines (published February 12, 
2002) for Federal agencies to implement Executive Order 13164, establishing written 
procedures to facilitate the provision of reasonable accommodation. Supervisors who 
were aware of the Executive order were more likely to say their agency had a formal 
process (86 percent) than supervisors who were not aware of the new guidelines (73 
percent).

Several questions asked if the respondent had made specific changes to make job 
interviews more accessible to applicants with disabilities. If they had made a change, they 
were asked how difficult it had been to make. Not surprisingly, given the nature of their 
position, HR respondents were significantly more likely to have made the changes (67-88 
percent) compared to the supervisors (52-57 percent). A comparison between the two 
groups regarding the ease of making such changes showed that in both groups, nearly 
four out of five respondents found making changes in the questions asked in interviews 
easy or very easy. Interestingly, supervisors were slightly more likely to rate “making 
interview locations accessible” as easy than were HR respondents (91 compared to 85 
percent). This may be related to the fact that such facility alterations more likely fall in 
the realm of responsibility of HR personnel. Making accommodations for those with 
visual or auditory disabilities was found to be more difficult by both groups, but 
especially so for supervisors. Nearly a quarter (24 percent) of supervisors reported that 
making information accessible to those with visual or learning disabilities was difficult 
(15 percent of HR/EEO) while 17 percent of supervisors said that making information 
accessible for those with hearing impairments was difficult (eight percent of HR/EEO).

Another comparable set of questions included the respondents’ perceptions of barriers to 
the employment or advancement for people with disabilities in their agency. Overall, only 
about one in ten respondents in both groups saw costs related to training and additional 
supervision as a barrier (See Chart 4). Surprisingly HR/EEO respondents were 
significantly more likely to see costs of accommodations as being a barrier (19 percent) 
than the supervisors (11 percent). The HR/EEO respondents were more than twice as 
likely to view attitudes and stereotypes as barriers than the supervisors (45 percent 
compared to 20 percent). This discrepancy might be due to HR/EEO respondents more 
likely being involved in or aware of issues relating to problems in this area than the 
supervisors are, as such issues may more often be brought to their attention. It may be 
that the supervisor responses better reflect the actual situation in the general Federal 
workforce overall; that is, attitudes and stereotypes towards people with disabilities may 
not be as significant a problem in actual workplaces as HR/EEO believes.

Other differences in perception of barriers included over one third of HR/EEO viewing 
“supervisor knowledge of which accommodation to make” as a barrier, compared to 23 
percent of supervisors, and 56 percent of HR/EEO perceiving a “lack of related 
experience” on the part of the employee with a disability as a barrier, compared to only 
48 percent of supervisors. Nearly half of both groups (44 percent) saw “lack of requisite 
skills and training” on the part of a person with a disability as a barrier.

Chart 4: 

HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives on Barriers to Employment or Advancement of 
People with Disabilities

In this table, the following column headings have been abbreviated: 
Percentage of HR/EEO Respondents who found this item a barrier (HR/EEO); 
Percentage of Supervisors who found this item a barrier (Supervisors)

Cost of training.
HR/EEO: 12%
Supervisors: 8%

Additional cost of supervision.
HR/EEO: 11%
Supervisors: 10%

Cost of accommodations.
HR/EEO: 19%
Supervisors: 11%

Attitudes/stereotypes.
HR/EEO: 45%
Supervisors: 20%

Supervisor knowledge of which accommodation to make.
HR/EEO: 34%
Supervisors: 23%

Lack of requisite skills and training on behalf of the person with a disability.
HR/EEO: 47%
Supervisors: 43%

Lack of related experience on behalf of the person with a disability.
HR/EEO: 56%
Supervisors: 48%

Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U.S. Federal Government 
Agencies: HR/EEO and Supervisor Perspectives. Presidential Task Force on Employment 
of Adults with Disabilities/Cornell University, 2002. 

(End Chart 4)

As would be expected, supervisors were slightly less likely to be knowledgeable about 
the agency’s affirmative action employment goals, with about one in ten responding 
“don’t know,” when asked whether their agency sets affirmative action employment 
goals and makes an effort to achieve them. However, of those who answered the 
question, a significantly larger proportion of supervisors (57 percent) than HR/EEO 
respondents (50 percent) felt that their agency put a great deal of effort into setting and 
achieving their affirmative action goals. A similar situation was found regarding a survey 
item about an agency having a grievance or dispute resolution process in place; similarly, 
approximately one in ten supervisors did not know. However of those who were able to 
answer the question, 95 percent of both sets of respondents said that their agency did 
have such a process.

Both groups were asked about their use of a number of resources in addressing ADA 
issues, and the degree of helpfulness of those they had used. Not surprisingly, HR/EEO 
respondents were far more likely to have a need for such services, and were therefore 
much more likely to use them than were supervisors. A com- parison was made of how 
helpful respondents found the resources they had used. Most of the resources, including 
the Job Accommodation Network (JAN), disability management/benefits staff, legal 
counsel, safety/ergonomics, staff professional societies and dispute resolution were found 
to be helpful by close to three quarters of all respondents. However there were 
differences in how the two groups rated three of the other resources. Supervisors were 
more likely to find the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and union 
representatives helpful than the HR/ EEO respondents (78 percent compared to 60 
percent EEOC office, and 60 percent compared to 43 percent for the use of union 
representatives). Although the supervisors rated their agency’s EEO office as helpful as 
the EEOC, more HR/EEO respondents reported the agency’s EEO office to be helpful 
(84 percent compared to 77 percent).

Regarding types of informational mediums used, not surprisingly, two to three times 
more HR/EEO respondents than supervisors made use of the variety of informational 
mediums. There was agreement, however, that print or video materials were used by the 
largest number of respondents (85 percent for HR/EEO, 42 percent for supervisors), with 
on-site consulting used by three quarters (76 percent) of the HR/EEO and a third (34 
percent) of supervisors.

Both groups were asked if their agency had a return to work policy for employees who 
are injured or become disabled. The majority of both groups responded affirmatively to 
having some sort of program, either formal or informal. However, while nine out of ten 
HR/EEO respondents were aware of such programs, only about two thirds of the 
supervisors were. Those who were aware of such programs were asked to what extent the 
program contributed to several issues. Although the majority of both sets of respondents 
felt the programs contributed in the areas asked, the HR/EEO respondents tended to be 
more positive regarding the results than the supervisors. With regards to supervisor 
awareness of the accommodation process, 89 percent of the HR/EEO respondents saw the 
programs contributing “a great deal” or “somewhat,” compared with 78 percent of 
supervisors. Ninety-two percent of HR/EEO felt the programs contributed “a great deal” 
or “somewhat” towards the “recognition of the importance of confidentiality of medical 
information” (84 percent of the supervisors), and nine out of ten (90 percent) HR/EEO 
respondents felt that the program was helpful in raising the acceptance of employees with 
disabilities, compared to only three quarters (77 percent) of the supervisors.

Summary and Implications

The Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities (PTFEAD) 
collaborated with Cornell University to conduct research in the Federal sector workforce 
that responds to Executive Order 13078, which relates to the Federal government as a 
model employer of people with disabilities. This research was a part of the efforts of the 
Task Force to meet the Section 2(a) mandate of the Executive Order. This states that 
“The Office of Personnel Management, the Department of Labor, and the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission shall submit to the Task Force a review of Federal 
Government personnel laws, regulations, and policies and, as appropriate, shall 
recommend or implement changes necessary to improve Federal employment policy for 
adults with disabilities. This review shall include personnel practices and actions such as: 
hiring, promotion, benefits, retirement, workers’ compensation, retention, accessible 
facilities, job accommodations, layoffs, and reductions in force.”

The first step in this endeavor was to conduct an analysis of the policy and practice 
efforts of Federal agency Human Resource (HR) Directors and Equal Employment 
Opportunity (EEO) personnel in recruiting and retaining persons with disabilities in 
Federal employment; it included a telephone survey on employment disability 
nondiscrimination policies and practices of 403 HR and EEO professionals across 96 
Federal agencies. The second step was a survey of 1,001 Federal supervisors and 
managers in the 17 PTFEAD agencies, which paralleled similar information obtained 
from the initial survey. This report summarizes these two studies and describes how 
Federal departments and agencies are responding to civil rights legislation, specifically 
the employment disability nondiscrimination requirements of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act and the Rehabilitation Act. The results from this research indicate that 
much progress has been made, but many barriers to the recruitment, hiring, retention, and 
career advancement of adults with disabilities in the Federal workforce remain, which 
warrant attention and concerted response if continued progress is to be made.

What follows is a summary of specific findings and future actions that those findings 
suggest.

Increase Visibility of Federal Disability Affirmative Action

Members of both groups were queried regarding their agency’s affirmative employment 
goals for persons with disabilities, and the agency’s efforts to achieve these goals. Not 
surprisingly, supervisors were slightly less likely to be knowledgeable about the agency’s 
affirmative action employment goals, with about one in ten responding “don’t know,” 
when asked whether their agency sets affirmative action employment goals and makes an 
effort to achieve them. However, of those who answered the question, a significantly 
larger proportion of supervisors (57 percent) than HR/EEO respondents (50 percent) felt 
that their agency put a great deal of effort into setting and achieving their affirmative 
action goals. Perhaps supervisors are closer to the actual selection event and subsequent 
training of the new employee, and are more aware of these efforts at the grass roots level, 
which might explain the difference in perception. Increased information dissemination 
across all levels of the Federal government about the affirmative action goals for people 
with disabilities appears to be indicated.

Accommodations for Applicants with Visual or Auditory Disabilities Need Attention

Eighty percent of the supervisors reported hiring new employees in the past five years (or 
since they became a Federal supervisor, if less than five years), with onethird of these 
reporting that they had hired at least one person with a disability in this period. Yet, HR/ 
EEO respondents are more likely to have made accommodations to make interviews 
more accessible than are supervisors—not surprising given their position. However, of 
those who made specific changes, supervisors were slightly more likely to rate “making 
inter- view locations more accessible” as easy or very easy than the HR/EEO 
respondents. Accommodations for visual or auditory disabilities were reported as more 
difficult than other accommodations for both groups, and both groups reported least 
familiarity with these kinds of accommodations. This finding is significant in light of the 
recent focus of Section 508 to the Rehabilitation Act. Section 508 mandates that all 
Federal technology purchases be fully accessible to employees with disabilities which is 
particularly relevant to individuals with visual and hearing disabilities. Significant 
technical assistance and training at the agency level will be required if Section 508 is to 
be successfully implemented.

Supervisor Role and the Agency Accommodation Structure

Both respondent groups report having made accommodations for their employees with 
disabilities, with little indication from respondents that accommodations cannot be made 
when asked for. However, perhaps further attention should be given to the fact that both 
groups reported a lower incidence of accommodation requests than might be expected as 
approximately seven percent of the Federal workforce is persons with disabilities.*7 In 
the HR/EEO Federal representative survey, one in five respondents reported their agency 
as not having received any accommodation requests in the prior fiscal year. In the initial 
survey report, the question was raised if this was a function of this information not 
getting to the central reporting system of each agency. There would seem to be a ready 
mechanism for getting further information on this from most agencies, as the majority 
reported having a formal process in place for handling accommodation requests. It was 
hypothesized that, since the immediate supervisor is most often cited as the final 
decision-maker in accommodation decisions by the HR/EEO respondents, perhaps the 
reporting mechanism was located at a more central level, thereby being less available to 
the HR/EEO respondents surveyed.

The second survey, of supervisors themselves, con- firmed that supervisors play a critical 
role in the accommodation process for applicants and employees with disabilities in the 
Federal workforce. Fully half of the supervisors surveyed saw themselves as taking a 
central role in the accommodation decision-making process. However, again the number 
of accommodation requests was lower than might be expected. Half of the supervisors 
had received at least one accommodation request over the past five years, over a third had 
received between one to three requests, and one in ten had received between four and ten 
requests. Perhaps more accommodation occurs than is actually documented, and is not 
thought of as an “accommodation,” but rather as just a part of effective management. 
There is some support of this hypothesis as more supervisors reported actually making 
accommodations than reported receiving requests. Another factor that may contribute to 
the low number of accommodations could be that individuals needing accommodations 
are for some reason hesitant to request them.

The number of disability claims lends some credence to this hypothesis. “Failure to 
provide reasonable accommodation” was noted as the most common disability related 
claim by both the HR/EEO respondents and individual supervisors (36 percent and seven 
percent respectively). This number of claims strongly suggests that there are indeed 
issues relating to providing accommodations to employees with disabilities that needs to 
be examined in greater detail.

Increase Use of Hiring Authorities

Another area for concern is the limited extent to which Federal agencies use special 
hiring authorities. Only one in four of the HR/EEO agency respondents re- 38 ported 
frequently using the Schedule A or B provisions for hiring persons with disabilities or 
using the special hiring program for veterans with disabilities. Only slightly more than 
half of the supervisors involved in recruitment reported being very familiar or somewhat 
familiar with the special hiring authorities for the Federal government that promote hiring 
disabled veterans, while only about one-third were familiar with hiring 
readers/interpreters and other personal assistants for employees with disabilities, and the 
special hiring authorities for hiring people with cognitive disabilities (mental retardation), 
significant physical disabilities, or people who have recovered from mental illness. These 
provisions appear to be an under-utilized tool by Federal agencies, lessening the 
effectiveness of Federal agencies in increasing the employment of people with 
disabilities. This lack of awareness of these provisions suggest that much more promotion 
of these Federal hiring authorities and supporting initiatives needs to be done among both 
Federal HR and EEO professionals and supervisors. These are areas for further 
exploration where changes might be indicated.

Supports Needed for Specific Populations

The majority of agencies report having made changes in their existing recruitment, pre-
employment screening, testing, and orientation procedures in order to comply with civil 
rights laws. However, making information accessible for a person with a visual or 
learning disability, or a person who is deaf or hard of hearing, was an area reported more 
difficult than others, in terms of accommodations in the pre-employment area. 
Respondents indicated that their interview staff are least familiar with interview 
considerations relating to people with visual or auditory impairments, such as using a text 
telephone or relay service to set up interviews with deaf or hard of hearing applicants, 
using a reader to assist a person with a visual impairment or learning disability, or with 
adapting print materials used in interviews to large print, diskette, or Braille.

Another area for further exploration is the workplace support system needed for persons 
with psychiatric disabilities. Both Federal HR/EEO respondents and the supervisors 
indicated a desire for further information on accommodations for persons with 
psychiatric disabilities. This is also consistent with the supervisors’ responses regarding 
their knowledge and experience with the special hiring authorities. Ways to use the 
proposed new hiring authorities for this group, as well as how to provide supports, once 
individuals have been employed, need to be examined.

The use of job coaches was another area in which supervisors indicated less familiarity. 
Since some of the target populations for hiring in the Federal sector, such as persons with 
developmental disabilities/ mental retardation, neurological disabilities such as traumatic 
brain injury, and psychiatric disabilities, are groups that have proven to benefit from the 
supported employment approach, familiarizing supervisors with the advantages of 
selected use of job coaches would appear most beneficial.

Address Continuing Attitude Issues through Diversity and Inclusion Strategies

Some remaining barriers to employment for persons with disabilities identified by 
Federal agencies were within the actual workplace culture. Attitudes toward people with 
disabilities continue as a workplace integration issue, even though this was an area where 
most agencies reported having made changes. However, the HR/EEO respondents were 
more than twice as likely to view attitudes and stereotypes as barriers than the supervisors 
(45 percent compared to 20 percent). This discrepancy might be due to HR/EEO 
respondents more likely being involved in or aware of issues relating to problems in this 
area than the supervisors are, as such issues may more often be brought to their attention. 
It may be that the supervisor responses better reflect the actual situation in the general 
Federal workforce overall; that is, attitudes and stereotypes towards people with 
disabilities may not be as significant a problem in individual Federal workplaces as 
HR/EEO believes.

However, to make sure that education on attitudes toward persons with disabilities does 
routinely get addressed in the Federal workplace but not necessarily over-emphasized, 
perhaps this is an area that can be merged with diversity programming across all 
agencies. Implementers of these recommendations should closely examine Federal 
agency training programs and curriculums to determine the extent to which disability 
issues are included in existing programming. It would be a valuable discussion with 
Federal agencies as to whether the presence of diversity programs in the past has been of 
any assistance in addressing diversity issues more broadly, as well as such issues, as 
disability discrimination and negative attitudes or stereotypes toward persons with 
disabilities. Since diversity or inclusion programs are increasing in popularity in the 
private sector, joint exploration with non-Federal employers of their application to 
disability concerns, and resulting benefits, might be useful.

Engage Unions in Accommodation in Hiring and Retention Efforts

The Federal workplace is heavily unionized. According to the HR/EEO respondents, 
unions are often involved in a variety of disability related issues including the 
accommodation process. Three out of five supervisors who used unions to assist in the 
accommodation process found unions to be helpful. Therefore, unions may be a 
productive place to continue information gathering in the accommodation process to 
learn more about barriers to employment for people with disabilities, and an appropriate 
force to engage in addressing the barriers to employees with disabilities.

Areas for Further Training and Technical Assistance

It appears that extensive training on civil rights policies and practices for people with 
disabilities has occurred, and yet survey results indicate that further training, as well as 
technical assistance, is needed. The HR/EEO respondents reported a significant amount 
of training having occurred at their level. Nine out of ten supervisors reported having had 
some formal civil rights training as a Federal supervisor, with approximately half of those 
trained receiving between one and 15 hours of disability related training. This training 
was most often provided as a part of general employment discrimination or diversity 
training, or of general supervisory/management training. In terms of promoting further 
information among supervisors on disability-related topics, respondents saw making 
ADA/disability employment a mandatory element of management training as the most 
effective incentive to encourage attendance at disability nondiscrimination related 
training.

Both groups were asked about their perception of remaining barriers to employment and 
advancement opportunities for people with disabilities in their respective agencies. There 
was a difference in perception of the barrier of “supervisor knowledge of which 
accommodation to make,” with over one third of HR/EEO viewing it as a barrier, 
compared to only 23 percent of supervisors. These reports highlight many areas where 
the Federal government can and should provide additional promotion, outreach, and 
technical assistance at all levels of the organization, but particularly to Federal agency 
supervisors. This includes use of special hiring authorities; accommodations for people 
with visual, learning, and hearing disabilities, and people with psychiatric disabilities; 
alternative dispute resolution; and laws governing employment of people with 
disabilities. Only two in five supervisors surveyed were aware of any one of the 
following executive orders: the hiring of 100,000 qualified individuals with disabilities 
over the next five years (Executive Order 13163); the EEOC guidelines for Federal 
agencies to establish written procedures to facilitate the provision of reasonable 
accommodation (Executive Order 13164); and the July, 2000 Federal Initiative 
(Presidential Memorandum) regarding telecommuting/ 40 telework for individuals with 
significant disabilities. Over a third were not aware of any of the three and less than one 
in five (16 percent) reported awareness of all of them. This low level of awareness is 
particularly disturbing in light of the fact that a third of the supervisors reported being 
very involved in the recruitment process.

Full, effective implementation of such unique provisions as Section 508 may well 
necessitate providing training on disability nondiscrimination and affirmative action 
requirements to groups of Federal sector employees not previously targeted, such as 
equipment procurement and technology specialists. Approximately three of four 
supervisors reported that the following would be helpful in implementing the Technology 
Nondiscrimination requirements of Section 508: The technical staff within their agency 
(i.e. chief information officer/ helpdesk), centralized technical assistance on technology 
accessibility issues, and training procurement specialists in Section 508 requirements.

Equip and Promote Resources Used to Resolve Civil Rights Issues

In both surveys, HR/EEO staff were most often used to resolve accommodation and 
disability-related issues, and were seen as very helpful when they were used. Far less 
often used were the Disabilities Services Office, selective placement coordinator, and the 
Job Accommodation Network (JAN), despite the fact that these resources were seen as 
helpful or very helpful in resolving ADA disputes by three-quarters or more of those who 
used them.

Again, this is an area where it is important that the Federal government ensures that 
human resource personnel and EEO personnel are well informed about disability-related 
issues and resources, as they themselves are the most frequently identified resource 
consulted by many supervisors to resolve ADA issues. In addition, it appears that the 
services of disability specialty organizations within Federal agencies need to be better 
promoted among Federal supervisors.

Alternative Dispute Resolution

Almost all of the agencies reported having a grievance or dispute resolution process in 
place for accommodations, yet a U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) report indicates 
that many employment discrimination disputes, including those relating to disability 
discrimination, are making their way to the EEOC.*8 The length of time for processing 
these disputes continues to increase. It would appear that more work must be done to 
encourage and inform dispute resolution, particularly on accommodation issues, earlier 
on and closer to the workplace. Alternative dispute resolution is an area that is gaining in 
popularity in the private sector, and again may be an area that the Federal sector might 
want to further explore. An example might be setting up model teams within agencies 
that represent the various interested parties in the accommodation process such as the 
person with a disability, HR representative, supervisor, health and safety representative, 
union, and EEO representative.

Use of Disability Management Programs

Two-thirds of the HR/EEO respondents reported that their agency has a formal or 
informal disability management program. Among the supervisor respondents, blue collar 
supervisors were more likely to be familiar with such a program, where one existed. Both 
HR/EEO and supervisor respondents who reported having such a program within their 
agency indicated that these programs contribute to implementation of civil rights laws by 
either raising awareness of the importance of medical confidentiality, raising acceptance 
of employees with disabilities, raising supervisor awareness of the accommodation 
process, and providing an organi- zational structure for accommodation. This is an area 
that perhaps could be further explored and actively encouraged as a programmatic 
structure for support for workplace disability nondiscrimination and accommodation 
policies and practices.

Disability Employment and Training Policy

Overall, only about one in ten respondents in both groups saw costs related to training 
and additional supervision of persons with disabilities as a barrier to employment or 
advancement for people with disabilities in their agency. Surprisingly, HR/EEO 
respondents were significantly more likely to see costs of accommodations as being a 
barrier (19 percent) than the supervisors (11 percent). Nearly half of both groups (44 
percent) saw “lack of requisite skills and training” on the part of a person with a disability 
as a barrier, and 56 percent of HR/EEO perceived a “lack of related experience” on the 
part of the employee with a disability as a barrier, as did 48 percent of supervisors.

The consistently high degree of perception of disparity in requisite skills, training, and 
related experience of persons with disabilities has implications for employment and 
disability social policy changes to advance the interests of people with disabilities in the 
employment and training arena. It is vital that initiatives such as those in existence under 
the Workforce Investment Act include people with disabilities in their mandate and 
implementation. This means not only having the direction for such inclusion written into 
the legislation and resulting regulations, but also making certain that implementation at 
the local level takes into account the unique service delivery needs of such system users. 
Success at this level calls for skilled professionals who will understand and be able to 
identify the service needs of persons with disabilities to assist them in making meaningful 
choices for training and subsequent employment. This also necessitates physical and 
communication accessibility of such service systems.

Visible Top Management Commitment Imperative

Both HR/EEO and supervisor respondents were asked about their perceptions of the 
degree of effectiveness of ways to reduce remaining barriers to employment and 
advancement for people with disabilities. For both groups, top management commitment 
was seen as the most effective means to reduce barriers. This affirms the importance of a 
continuing commitment to such approaches as the “model employer” initiative which has 
prompted this study, as well as the Executive Orders which have raised visibility in the 
Federal government of the need for a formal reasonable accommodation process, hiring 
targets for people with disabilities, and the need to explore flexible employment 
alternatives such as off-site and telecommuting positions for persons with disabilities or 
chronic health problems.

Further Research and Next Steps Needed

The results discussed in this report indicate a need for further research. A significant area 
for further consideration is the impact of technology on the Federal workplace, and ways 
to promote full implementation of the provisions of Section 508. Such research has been 
conducted in the private sector and could be replicated in the Federal government. 
Needed further research also includes research on the impact of Federal training 
programs on such issues as attitudinal barriers versus the perceived knowledge and skills 
of people with disabilities as employment barriers. These survey results also indicate 
many areas where the Federal government can and should provide additional promotion, 
outreach, and technical assistance to its agencies. This includes education on the use of 
special hiring authorities; accommodations for people with visual, learning, and hearing 
disabilities, and people with psychiatric disabilities; disability resources available to 
facilitate the accommodations process; government-wide initiatives to promote the 
recruitment, hiring, retention, and career advancement of people with disabilities; and 
improving technology, telecommuting and telework.

Finally, this report highlights policy areas that warrant consideration by the Federal 
government. These areas include the possibility of mandatory training in 
nondiscriminatory practices for supervisors; government- wide consistency in policies 
and procedures for expanding telecommuting and telework for people with disabilities; 
more firmly establishing agencywide goals in the area of employment of people with 
disabilities through the Government Performance and Results Act; and re-visiting the 
Federal government’s commitment to hiring and reasonable accommodation initiatives 
begun in 2000.

The information contained in this report will be broadly disseminated to Task Force 
member agencies as well as Federal departments and agencies for consideration in their 
efforts to increase opportunities and remove barriers to the employment of people with 
disabilities in the Federal government.


Footnotes

*1 Under Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act, Federal employers may not discriminate 
against people with disabilities in hiring, placement, or advancement practices. Federal 
agencies are required to establish affirmative action plans to make it clear that the Federal 
Government is an equal opportunity employer. This applies to each department, agency 
and instrumentality of the Executive Branch of the Federal Government. See http: 
//www.jan.wvu.edu/media/REHABACT.html for further information.

*2 Visit the Cornell University website at 
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html for a copy of this report.

*3 Further information about this research can be found in Bruyère, S. (2000). Disability 
Employment Policies and Practices in Private and Federal Sector Organizations. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University, School of Industrial and Labor Relations Extension Division, 
Program on Employment and Disability. Go to 
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/download.html?pub_id=637 for an online copy.

*4 Akabas, S., Gates, L., & Galvin, D. (1992). Disability management: A complete 
system to reduce costs, increase productivity, meet employee needs, and ensure legal 
compliance. New York: AMACOM, p.2.

*5 See http://www.opm.gov/feddata/demograp/demograp.asp for more information.

*6 For further information, see http://www.section508.gov.

*7 Source: Demographic Profile of the Federal Workforce. September
20, 2000 (unpublished). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Office of Personnel
Management.

*8 United States General Accounting Office (2000). Equal employment
opportunity: Discrimination complaint caseloads and underlying
causes require EEOC’s sustained attention. GAO report GAO/TGGD-
00-104. Washington, D.C.: Author.


APPENDICES


Appendix A:  HR/EEO Survey

Survey of the Federal Government on Human Resources/ EEO Policies and Practices in 
Employment of People with Disabilities 

Sponsored by: 
The Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities 

Conducted by: 
Cornell University, School of Industrial and Labor Relations’ Extension Division 

The research which sponsored the original survey design was funded by the U. S. 
Department of Education 
National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research for a Research and 
Demonstration Project to the Program on Employment and Disability in the School of 
Industrial and Labor Relations’ Extension Division at Cornell University (Grant 
#HI33A70005), Susanne M. Bruyère, Principal Investigator. 


I. Demographic Information 

Definitions 

The employment provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the 
Rehabilitation Act require reasonable accommodation. A reasonable accommodation is a 
modification or adjustment to a job, the work environment, or the way things are usually 
done that enables a qualified individual to enjoy an equal opportunity. Accommodations 
must be provided unless the employer can show that the accommodation would impose 
an undue hardship on the business. 

A "person with a disability" is someone who: a) has a physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits a major life activity, b) has a record of such an impairment or, c) is 
regarded as having such an impairment. 

Instructions 

Please answer each question as it pertains to your agency. When questions refer to your 
agency, please answer for the unit of your agency for which you are responsible (for 
example, your branch rather than your entire agency nationwide). 

1. Agency size at your location: 
(Please circle one response) 

1 0-14 employees 
2 15-25 employees 
3 26-50 employees 
4 51-249 employees 
5 250-499 employees 
6 500-1499 employees
7 1500-2499 employees
8 2500-3499 employees
9 3500-4999 employees
10 5000+ employees


2. #2 has been deleted for purposes of this survey. 

3. Your title: (Please circle one response) 
1 Director/ Chief 
2 Deputy Assistant Secretary 
3 Deputy Director 
4 Personnel Manager 
5 Officer 
6 Specialist 
7 Program Coordinator 
8 Other (please specify) 34 


4. Your function: (Please circle one response) 
1 Administrative 
2 Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)/ Affirmative Action 
3 Benefits 
4 Compensation 
5 Disability 
6 Diversity 
7 Employee Relations 
8 Employment/ Recruitment 
9 Health/ Safety/ Security 
10 Human Resources (HR) 
11 Labor/ Industrial Relations 
12 Legal 
13 Organizational Development 
14 Training & Development 
15 Other (Please specify) 


5. Number of years with your agency:  (Fill in blank) years 

6. Are you reporting for: (Please circle one response) 
1 Entire agency (including regions) 
2 Headquarters 
3 Regional office only 

II. Issue Areas 

A. The Reasonable Accommodation Process 

PTF1. In the fiscal year 1999, how many accommodation requests has your agency 
received? 
Number of Requests (fill in blank)

PTF2. Does your agency have a formal process for handling accommodation requests? 
1 Yes 2 No 8 Don't know 

1. To meet the needs of your employees with disabilities, has your agency: 
(Please circle one response for each item) 
(Responses are: yes; no, not able to; no, never needed to make accommodations; and 
don’t know)

a. made existing facilities accessible to employees with 1 2 3 8 disabilities (restrooms, 
door entrances, hallways, etc.) 
b. restructured jobs or modified work hours 
c. made reassignment to vacant positions 
d. acquired or modified equipment or devices 
e. acquired or modified examination or training materials 
f. provided qualified readers or interpreters (includes personal assistants) 
g. been flexible in its application of HR policies 
h. changed supervisory methods 
i. made parking or transportation accommodations 
j. provided written job instructions 
k. modified work environment  (orthopedic chair, lower desk, etc.) 
l. provided a job coach 
m. Other (Please specify) 


2. If an accommodation request is made, who makes the final decision regarding the 
provision of the accommodation? (Please circle one response) 

1 Immediate supervisor of the employee requesting 
2 Occupational health/ medical clinic staff 
3 Safety/ ergonomic staff 
4 HR staff 
5 Legal counsel 10 No single final responsible party 
(internal or external) 
6 Your agency's EEO office 11 Don't know 
7 Other manager/ director
8 Disability management/ benefits staff
9 Other (Please specify)


3. Does your agency keep data on the accommodations it makes for employees with 
disabilities for any of the following purposes? (Please circle all that apply) 

1 Future accommodations in similar situations 
2 Tracking accommodation costs 
3 Dispute resolution/ settlement 
4 Regulatory reporting requirements 
5 Disability claim coordination 
6 Other (Please specify) 
7 Do not keep data on accommodations 


B. Recruitment, Pre-Employment Screening, Testing, and Orientation 

PTF1. In order to recruit people with disabilities, how often does your agency make use 
of the provisions contained in schedule A and schedule B through which people with 
disabilities can be exempted from the competitive appointment process? 

1 Frequently 
2 Occasionally 
3 Never
8 Don't know 
9 Not aware of these provisions 


PTF2. How frequently does your agency make use of special hiring programs for 
disabled veterans? 

1 Frequently
 2 Occasionally 
3 Never 
8 Don't know 
9 Not aware of these programs 


1. In order to comply with the ADA and/ or the Rehabilitation Act, how easy or difficult 
was it for your agency to make the following changes or adaptations? 

(for each change, choices are: Very easy, Easy, Neither easy nor difficult, Difficult, Not 
able to make this change, Didn’t need to make this change, and Don’t know) 

a. Making recruiting locations accessible to people with disabilities 
b. Changing wording of job  applications 
c. Changing questions asked in interviews 
d. Making interview locations  accessible to people with disabilities 
e. Modifying pre-employment  testing (e. g. time flexibility) 
f. Arranging for medical tests post-offer 
g. Making new employee  orientation accessible to people with disabilities 
h. Making information accessible  for a hearing impaired person (e. g. sign language 
interpreter; text telephone; captioning on video) 
i. Making information accessible  for a person with a visual or learning impairment (e. g. 
a reader, Braille, large print, or  audio-cassette or telephone version of application) 
j. Making restrooms accessible  to people with disabilities 
k. Other (Please specify) 


PTF3. How familiar are you with your agency's goals for employment of persons with 
disabilities that are included in your agency's Affirmative Employment Plan? 

1 Very familiar
 2 Familiar 
3 Neither familiar nor unfamiliar 
4 Unfamiliar 
5 Very unfamiliar 
8 Don't know 


PTF4. To what extent does your agency set reasonable affirmative employment goals and 
make an effort to achieve them? 

1 A great deal 
2 Somewhat 
3 Minimally
 4 Not at all 
8 Don't know 


3. Generally, how familiar with the following are your agency's staff who are responsible 
for applicant interviewing?
 (Please circle one response per item) 
(choices are:  Very familiar, Familiar, Neither familiar nor unfamiliar, Unfamiliar, Very 
unfamiliar, Don’t know)


a. Framing questions to applicants about the  ability to perform specific job tasks rather 
than about disability 
b. Restrictions on obtaining medical  examinations and medical history information 
c. Restrictions on eliciting information about  medical issues affecting applicants' health 
and safety on the job 
d. Knowing when to ask an applicant about  how s/ he would perform specific job tasks 
e. Accessing sign language interpreters  
f. Using a teletypewriter (TTY) or relay  service to set up interviews 
g. Using a reader to assist a person with  a learning disability or vision impairment 
h. Adapting print materials used in the  interview to large print, diskette, or Braille 
i. Knowing when to test for illegal drugs  

Section C has been eliminated for the purposes of this survey. 38 


D. Opportunities for Promotion/ Training 


1. In your opinion, do any of the following pose a barrier to employment or advancement 
for persons with disabilities in your agency? (Please circle all that apply) 

1 Cost of accommodations 
2 Cost of training 
3 Additional cost of supervision 
4 Attitudes/ stereotypes 
5 Supervisor knowledge of which accommodation to make
 6 Lack of requisite skills and training 
7 Lack of related experience 
8 Other (Please specify) 
9 No barriers 


2. How effective or ineffective would each of the following be in reducing barriers to 
employment or advancement for persons with disabilities within your agency? (Please 
circle one response for each item) 

(each option is to be ranked from  1 – very effective to 5 – very ineffective, or can choose 
“don’t know”)

a. Special budget allocation  
b. Short-term outside assistance with  job supervision (e. g. outside job coach) 
c. Staff training  
d. On-site consultation or technical assistance  
e. Mentoring  
f. Visible top management commitment  
g. Other (Please specify) 8 


3. In order to meet the needs of employees with disabilities, how easy or difficult was it 
for your agency to make the following changes? (Please circle one response for each 
item) 
(choices are Very easy, Easy, Neither easy nor difficult, Very difficult, Didn’t make this 
change, Didn’t need to make this change, and Don’t know)

a. Change in leave policy   
b. Adjusting policies regarding   medical questions and medical examinations of 
employees 
c. Changing co-worker or supervisor   attitudes towards employees with disabilities 
d. Ensuring equal pay and benefits   for employees with disabilities 
e. Creating flexibility within the   performance management system 
f. Modifying the return to work or   transitional employment policy 


4. Has your agency used the following to ensure that people with disabilities have access 
to meetings, promotional, social opportunities and/ or training? (Please circle one 
response for each item) 
(responses are Yes; No, not able to provide; No, never needed to provide, and Don’t 
know)

a. Wheelchair access 
b. Communication access for a hearing-impaired person (e. g. sign  language interpreter; 
text telephone; captioning on video; etc.) 
c. Communication access for a person with a visual or learning  impairment (e. g., 
Braille, large print, or audiocassette version  of application; reader) 
d. Time flexibility in test taking 
e. Removing volatile or scented substances from the air
f. Other (Please specify) 


E. Disciplinary Process, Grievance, Discharge, or Termination 

1. Does your agency have a grievance or dispute resolution process to deal with disability 
and accommodation issues? (Please circle one response) 

1 Yes 
2 No 
8 Don't know 


2. Has your agency experienced any of the following filed disability claims under the 
ADA? 
(Please circle one response for each item) 
(options are:  Yes, No, and Don't know)

a. Wrongful discharge 
b. Failure to provide reasonable accommodation 
c. Failure to hire 
d. Harassment 
e. Unfair discipline 
f. Failure to rehire 
g. Layoff 
h. Denied or reduced benefits 
i. Failure to promote 
j. Wage dispute 
k. Suspension

F. Interaction with Labor Relations/ Collective Bargaining Issues 

1. Are any of your employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement? (Please 
circle one response) 

1 Yes 
2 No (Please go to Section G, Question 1 )
8 Don't know (Please go to Section G, Question 1)

2. Is the union involved in the accommodation process? (Please circle one response) 
1 Yes 
2 No (Ü Please go to Section G, Question 1)
8 Don't know (Please go to Section G, Question 1)

3. In which of the following ways have unions been involved? (Please circle all that 
apply) 

1 Provided information on the rights of employees with disabilities 
2 Provided advice/ information on ways to accommodate employees with disabilities 
3 Provided representation in reasonable accommodation discussions 
4 Provided representation in grievance discussions when accommodation requests have 
been denied 
5 Consulted with employers on revising employment policies 
6 Other (Please specify_________________________________) 


G. Interaction with Other Employment Legislation 

1. How often has your agency been uncertain about how to handle the following 
concerning the ADA and 
Workers' Compensation? (Please circle one response for each item) 
(responses are: Frequently, Occasionally, Never, Not applicable, and Don’t know)

a. When an injured worker is also covered by the ADA 
b. When an injured worker returning to work following a work-related injury is entitled 
to reasonable accommodation 
c. Whether an injured worker who cannot return to full duties can be terminated 
d. How long the agency and injured worker must search for modified or alternate work 
before beginning vocational rehabilitation 
e. Whether transitional, light duty work can be considered a permanent reassignment for 
reasonable accommodation  purposes 
f. Safety issues involved in returning an injured worker to the job 


2. How often has your agency been uncertain about how to handle the following 
concerning the ADA and the Family and Medical Leave Act? (Please circle one response 
for each item) 
(responses are: Frequently, Occasionally, Never, Not applicable, and Don’t know)

a. Whether an employee who requests FMLA leave is also covered by the ADA 
b. Coordination of leave under the ADA and the FMLA, Workers' Comp., STD/ LTD, 
sick leave/ salary continuation 


3. How often has your agency been uncertain about how to handle the following 
concerning the ADA and the Occupational Safety and Health Act? (Please circle one 
response for each item) 
(responses are: Frequently, Occasionally, Never, Not applicable, and Don’t know)

a. Whether it is permissible to discipline an employee who is a risk to self or others 
b. Whether health and safety regulations supersede the confidentiality requirements of the 
ADA 
c. Whether worksite modifications or ergonomic changes constitute reasonable 
accommodations 


4. How often has your agency been uncertain about how to handle the following 
concerning the ADA and the Drug Free Workplace Act or the Omnibus Transportation 
Employee Testing Act? (Please circle one response for each item) 
(responses are: Frequently, Occasionally, Never, Not applicable, and Don’t know)

a. Whether an employee who is currently using alcohol is covered by the ADA 
b. Whether an employee who is currently using illegal drugs is covered by the ADA 
c. Whether a past drug user is covered by the ADA 
d. Whether it is permissible to suspend or fire an employee whose alcohol or drug use 
impairs job performance 


PTF5. How often has your agency been uncertain about how to handle the following 
concerning the Rehabilitation  Act requirements? (Please circle one response for each 
item)  
(responses are: Frequently, Occasionally, Never, Not applicable, and Don’t know)

a. Designing and implementing affirmative action requirements of Section 501 
b. Purchasing accessible technology/ equipment in compliance with Section 508


H. General 

PTF1. Have any of your employees  been trained in the Rehabilitation 
Act requirements? 
(Responses for this question are: Yes, No, and Don’t know.  If yes, check which 
employees have received the training:  HR staff, managerial staff, EEO, Other staff.  
Would you like more information in this area?  Yes/No)

PTF2. Have any of your employees  been trained in Federal Hiring  Schedules? 
(Responses for this question are: Yes, No, and Don’t know.  If yes, check which 
employees have received the training:  HR staff, managerial staff, EEO, Other staff.  
Would you like more information in this area?  Yes/No)

1. Have any of your  employees been trained in the following ADA topics?
(Responses for this question are: Yes, No, and Don’t know.  If yes, check which 
employees have received the training:  HR staff, managerial staff, EEO, Other staff.  
Would you like more information in this area?  Yes/No)

a. Non-discriminatory recruitment  and hiring practices 
b. The accommodation process  
c. Equal access in promotional  opportunities and training 
d. Accommodation for mental  disabilities 
e. Defining essential job functions  
f. Confidentiality requirements of  medical information 
g. Limitations and exclusions the  ADA and other Federal laws allow 
health plans to impose 
h. Non-discrimination in the  disciplinary process or termination 
i. Conflict resolution in the  accommodation process 
j. Disability awareness and/ or  sensitivity training 
k. Interaction with other  employment legislation 
l. Available print or  organizational resources to assist in the accommodation process 
m. Other (Please specify) 


2. Please indicate which of the following resources your agency utilizes to help resolve 
ADA issues and rate their degree of helpfulness. Please check if utilized and circle one 
response for each item utilized. 
(for each option the choices are: Utilize? (a check-box), followed by a rating of 1 (very 
helpful) to 5 (not helpful at all), and Don’t Know)

a. State vocational rehabilitation agencies 
b. Local independent living centers or other disability organizations 
c. Job Accommodation Network (toll-free number) 
d. The Regional ADA Technical Assistance Center (toll-free number) 
e. U. S. EEOC 
f. Your agency's EEO office 
g. Internal legal counsel 
g2. External legal counsel 
h. Your safety/ ergonomics staff 
i. Disability management/ benefits staff 
j. Union representative 
k. Other Federal agencies or professional society or business agency (e. g., OPM, MSPB, 
SHRM, IPMA) 
l. Dispute resolution center/ mediator 


3. Please indicate which of the following informational mediums you use to address your 
ADA issues and rate their degree of helpfulness. Please check if utilized and circle one 
response for each item utilized. 
(for each option the choices are: Utilize? (a check-box), followed by a rating of 1 (very 
helpful) to 5 (not helpful at all), and Don’t Know)

a. Print or video materials 
b. Telephone consultation/ information hotline 
c. On-site consultation/ training 
d. Web sites/ list serve/ U. S. EEOC homepage 
e. Organizational newsletter 
f. Other (Please specify) 


4. Does your agency have a return to work or disability management program for 
employees who are injured or become disabled? (Please circle one response) 

1 Yes, formal program with written policies/ procedures 
2 Yes, informal program with no formal written procedures 
3 No return to work/ disability management system 44 


5. To what extent has your agency's disability management program contributed to the 
following? 
Please circle one response for each item. 
(choices are: A great deal, Somewhat, Minimally, Not at all, Don’t Know)

a. Supervisor awareness of the accommodation process 
b. An organizational structure for providing accommodations 
c. Recognition of the importance of confidentiality  of medical information 
d. Raising the acceptance of employees with disabilities  by other employees 


6. If you would like a copy of the executive summary of the study results, please provide 
the following information: 

Name: 
Agency: 
Street address: 
City: 
State: Zip: 
Telephone: 

7. Would you be willing to participate in a follow-up in-person interview for this project? 
1 Yes 
2 No 

Thank you for your assistance! 
If you have any questions, 

please contact: Lisa Horn 
Telephone (toll-free): (888) 367-8404 
TDD: 607-255-2891 
E-mail: LLH5@ cornell. edu 


Appendix B:  Supervisor Survey

Survey of the Federal Government on Supervisor Practices in  Employment of People 
with Disabilities 

Sponsored by: 
The Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults  with Disabilities 

Conducted by: 
Cornell University School of Industrial & Labor Relations 

The research which sponsored the original survey design was funded by the U. S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research for 
a Research and Demonstration Project to the Program on Employment and Disability in 
the School of Industrial and Labor Relations Extension Division at Cornell University 
(grant #H133A70005), Susanne M. Bruyère, Principal Investigator 

©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 

Please answer each question as it pertains to your Agency/personal experience as a 
supervisor in the federal government. When questions refer to your agency, please 
answer for the unit of your agency for which you are responsible 

All responses to this survey are completely anonymous and confidential. Participation in 
this research is entirely voluntary, you may decline to answer or refuse to participate and 
may withdraw at any time without penalty. 

Definitions 

The employment provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the 
Rehabilitation Act require reasonable accommodation. A reasonable accommodation is a 
modification or adjustment to a job, the work environment, or the way things are usually 
done that enables a qualified individual with a disability to enjoy an equal opportunity. 
Reasonable accommodations must be provided unless the employer can show that the 
accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the business. (The law requires that 
only qualified people with disabilities are eligible for reasonable accommodation.) 
A "person with a disability" is someone who: a) has a physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits a major life activity, b) has a record of such an impairment or, c) is 
regarded as having such an impairment. 

A qualified individual with a disability is a person with a disability who: 

* Satisfies the requisite skill, education and other job- related requirements of the position 

* Can perform the essential functions of the position with or without reasonable 
accommodation. 

I. Demographic Information 

S1. Number of Federal employees for whom you are the immediate supervisor: (Please 
note number) 

S2. Total number of employees you supervise: total employees supervised (Please note 
number) (If = 0 then ineligible) 

S3. Number of years as a supervisor in the Federal government: years (If <1 year then 
ineligible) 

5. Number of years with your department or Agency: years 

II. Issue Areas 
A. The Reasonable Accommodation Process 

PTF2. Does your agency have a formal process for handling accommodation requests? 
1 Yes 2 No 8 Don't know 

1. To meet the needs of your employees with disabilities, have you or your agency on 
the behalf of an employee you supervise: 
(Please circle one response for each item. Possible responses are yes; no, not able to; no, 
never needed to; don’t know)

a. advocated to make existing facilities accessible to employees with disabilities 
(restrooms, door entrances, hallways, etc.) 
b. restructured jobs or modified work hours 
c. made reassignment to vacant positions 
d. acquired or modified equipment or devices 
e. acquired or modified examination or training materials 
f. provided qualified readers or interpreters (includes personal assistants) 
h. changed supervisory methods 
i. made parking or transportation accommodations 
j. provided written job instructions 
l. provided a job coach 
m. Other (Please specify ) 


S1. Over the past five fiscal years, or since you have been a Federal supervisor 
(whichever is less), how many accommodation requests have you received as a 
supervisor? 
Number of Requests 

S2. How many employees with disabilities have you had supervisory responsibilities for 
in the past five years? 
(if none skip to 2) 

S3. What types of disabilities have your employees had? (please check all that apply) 
a. Visual impairment 
b. Hearing impairment 
c. Missing extremities 
d. Partial paralysis 
e. Total paralysis 
f. Convulsive disorders 
g. Mental retardation 
h. Mental illness 
i. Genetic/ physical/ neurological condition affecting limbs and/ or spine 
j. Musculo-skeletal disorders (i. e. 
back, repetitive motion injury, etc.) 
k. Other (please specify) 

2. If an accommodation request is made, who would make the final decision regarding 
the provision of a accommodation? (Please circle one response) 

1. You as the immediate supervisor of the 
employee requesting 
12. You in consultation with your immediate 
supervisor 
2. Occupational health/ medical clinic staff 
3. Safety/ ergonomic staff 
4. HR staff 
5. Legal counsel (internal or external) 
6. Your agency's EEO office 
7. Other manager/ director 
8. Disability management/ benefits staff 
13. Disabilities services office 
9. Other (please specify) 
10. No single final responsible party) 
11. Don't know 

S4. Have you used the following resources for accommodation 
assistance? 
If YES: how helpful was it? (Very helpful, moderately helpful, somewhat helpful, 
slightly helpful, not helpful at all)
If NO: why not? (Not aware of this resource, Aware, but not needed, aware, but not 
helpful)

a. Central human resource personnel 
(Department wide) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
b. Servicing human resource personnel 
(sub-agency or unit level) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
c. Disabilities Services Office 
(i. e. CAP, COAST, TARGET Center) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
d. EEO office 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
e. Disability management/ benefits 
staff 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
f. Occupational health/ medical 
clinic staff 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
g. Safety/ ergonomic staff 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
h. Employee Assistance Program 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
i. External health care provider 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
j. State vocational rehabilitation 
agencies 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
k. Local independent living centers 
or other disability organizations 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
l. Job Accommodation Network 
(toll-free number) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
n. Disabled Employee Advisory Group 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
o. Selective Placement Coordinator 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 
m. Other 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 

B. Recruitment, Pre-Employment Screening, Testing, and Orientation 

S1. How many employees have you hired in the past five years or since you were a 
Federal supervisor (whichever is less)? 

S2. How many of these new hires have had a disability? 
S3. How involved are you in recruitment? 1 Very involved 2 Fairly involved 3 Slightly 
involved 4 Not at all involved 8 Don't know 

S4. How familiar are you with the special appointing authorities, to bring people with 
disabilities into the Federal workplace and how frequently have you used them? (Please 
circle one response per item) 
Familiarity: Very familiar, Somewhat familiar, slightly familiar, not aware of provisions.
Frequency of use: Frequently, occasionally, never.

a. For hiring people with cognitive disabilities (mental retardation), 
significant physical disabilities, or people who have recovered 
from mental illness 

b. For hiring readers/ interpreters and other personal assistants 
for employees with disabilities 

c. For hiring disabled veterans (30 percent disabled or more) 

1. In order to comply with the ADA and/ or the Rehabilitation Act, how easy or difficult 
was it for you to make the following changes or adaptations? 
(Very easy, easy, neither easy nor difficult, difficult, very difficult, not able to make this 
change, change not requested, don’t know).

c. Changing questions asked in interviews 
d. Making interview locations accessible to people with disabilities 
h. Making information accessible for a deaf or hard of hearing person 
(e. g. sign language interpreter; text telephone; captioning on video) 
i. Making information accessible for persons with visual or learning 
disabilities (e. g. a reader, Braille, large print, diskette, or audio-cassette 
or telephone version of application) 
l. Other (Please specify) 

PTF4. To what extent does your agency set reasonable affirmative employment goals and 
make an effort to achieve them? 
1 A great deal 2 Somewhat 3 Minimally 4 Not at all 8 Don't know 

3. Generally, how familiar are you with the following for applicant interviewing? (Please 
circle one response per item) 
(very familiar, familiar, neither familiar nor unfamiliar, unfamiliar, very unfamiliar, don’t 
know).
a. Framing questions to applicants 1 2 3 4 5 8 about the ability to perform specific 
job tasks rather than about disability 
b. Restrictions on obtaining medical 1 2 3 4 5 8 examinations and medical history 
information 
c. Restrictions on eliciting information 1 2 3 4 5 8 about medical issues affecting 
applicants' 
health and safety on the job 
d. Knowing when to ask an applicant about 1 2 3 4 5 8 how s/ he would perform specific 
job tasks 
e. Accessing sign language interpreters 1 2 3 4 5 8 
f. Using a teletypewriter (TTY) or relay service 1 2 3 4 5 8 to set up interviews 
g. Using a reader to assist a person with 1 2 3 4 5 8 a learning disability or vision 
impairment 
h. Adapting print materials used in the 1 2 3 4 5 8 interview to large print, diskette, or 
Braille 
i. Knowing when to test for illegal drugs 1 2 3 4 5 8 

D. Opportunities for Promotion/ Training 

1. In your opinion, do any of the following pose a barrier to employment or advancement 
for persons with disabilities in your agency? (Please circle all that apply) 

a Cost of accommodations 
b Cost of training 
c Additional cost of supervision 
i Additional cost of travel and transportation( such as a blind person having 
to have a driver to get to a worksite (if they can't drive themselves) 
d Attitudes/ stereotypes 
e A supervisor's knowledge of which accommodation to make 
f Lack of requisite skills and training on behalf of the person with a disability 
g Lack of related experience on behalf of the person with a disability 
j Lack of established policy/ procedures 
k Accommodation not provided when needed 
h Other (Please specify ) 

2. How effective or ineffective would each of the following be in reducing barriers to 
employment or advancement for persons with disabilities within your agency? (Please 
circle one response for each item) 
(rating of 1 to 5, with 1 being very effective, 5 being very ineffective. 8 is don’t know)

a. Special budget allocation/ centralized accommodation fund 1 2 3 4 5 8 
b. Short-term outside assistance with job supervision 1 2 3 4 5 8 (e. g. outside job coach) 
c. Staff training 1 2 3 4 5 8 
d. On-site consultation or technical assistance 1 2 3 4 5 8 
e. Mentoring 1 2 3 4 5 8 
f. Visible top management commitment 1 2 3 4 5 8 
Sg. Include affirmative action and accommodation items for 1 2 3 4 5 8 persons with 
disabilities in supervisor performance appraisals 
Sh. Changing co-worker/ supervisor attitudes towards persons 1 2 3 4 5 8 with disabilities 
Si. Departmental reward/ recognition ex. A certificate acknowledging outstanding 
performance 1 2 3 4 5 8 
Sj. Development and input from a disability advisory group 1 2 3 4 5 8 
Sk. Skills training for employees with disabilities 1 2 3 4 5 8 
g. Other (Please specify ) 1 2 3 4 5 8 

4. Have you used the following to ensure that people with disabilities you supervise have 
access to meetings, promotional, social opportunities and/ or training? (Please circle one 
response for each item) 
(yes, no, not able to provide, no, never needed to provide, don’t know)

a. Wheelchair access 
b. Communication access for deaf or hard of hearing person (e. g. sign language 
interpreter; text telephone; captioning 
on video; etc.) 
c. Communication access for persons with visual or learning disabilities (e. g., Braille, 
large print, diskette or audiocassette 
version of application; reader) 
f. Other (Please specify ) 

E. Disciplinary Process, Grievance, Discharge, or Termination 

1. Does your agency have a grievance or dispute resolution process to deal with disability 
and accommodation issues? (Please circle one response) 
1 Yes 2 No 8 Don't know 

2. Have you as a Federal supervisor ever experienced any of the following as a formal 
disability complaint? (Please circle one response for each item) 
Yes No Don't know 

a. Wrongful discharge 1 2 8 
b. Failure to provide reasonable accommodation 1 2 8 
c. Failure to hire 1 2 8 
d. Harassment 1 2 8 
e. Unfair discipline 1 2 8 
f. Failure to promote 1 2 8 
g. Suspension 1 2 8 
l. Other (specify) 1 2 8 

S3. If an accommodation dispute arises, how easy or difficult would the following be for 
you? 
(rated 1 to 5, with 1 being very easy and 5 being very difficult. 8 is don’t know)

a. Discussing accommodation needs with the individual 1 2 3 4 5 8 
b. Getting sufficient training on dispute resolution approaches 1 2 3 4 5 8 
c. Accessing a resource person to help with accommodation issues 1 2 3 4 5 8 (HR, EEO, 
health & safety, ergonomics, Employee Relations, etc.) 
d. Having access to a person trained in alternative dispute 1 2 3 4 5 8 resolution (ADR) 
e. Determining the most appropriate dispute resolution process 1 2 3 4 5 8 (Dispute 
resolution is conflict resolution, or for example using 
a mediator to solve a disagreement 
f. Effectively using the existing dispute/ complaint resolution 1 2 3 4 5 8 process Dispute 
resolution is conflict resolution or for example 
using a mediator to solve a disagreement 

H. General 

S1. Have you been trained in the following ADA/ Rehabilitation Act topics? Would you 
like more information in this area?
Training? Yes, no, don’t know
More information? Yes, no.

PTF2. The special appointing/ hiring authorities 1 2 8 1 2 
a. Non-discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices 1 2 8 1 2 
b. The accommodation process 1 2 8 1 2 
c. Equal access in promotional opportunities and training 1 2 8 1 2 
d. Accommodation for mental disabilities 1 2 8 1 2 
e. Defining essential job functions 1 2 8 1 2 
f. Confidentiality requirements of medical information 1 2 8 1 2 
h. Non-discrimination in the disciplinary process or termination 1 2 8 1 2 
i. Conflict resolution in the accommodation process 1 2 8 1 2 
j. Disability awareness and/ or sensitivity training 1 2 8 1 2 
Sk. Section 508 training (Section 508 requires that electronic 1 2 8 1 2 
and information technology developed, procured, maintained, 
or used by the Federal government be accessible to people 
with disabilities) 
m. Other (Please specify) 1 2 8 1 2 

IF all of the above questions are "no" or "don't know" SKIP TO S4 

S2. Approximately how many hours of formal ADA/ Rehabilitation Act training (class, 
seminar, conference) have you received as a Federal supervisor? 

None 
1-5hrs 
6-10hrs 
11-15hrs 
16-20hrs 
21-25hrs 
More than 25hrs 

S3. How was the ADA/ Rehabilitation Act training provided to you as a Federal 
supervisor? (circle all that apply) 

a. Specialized focus on disability by Federal Government staff expert 
b. Specialized focus on disability by external consultant 
c. As a part of general employment discrimination or diversity training 
d. As a part of general supervisory/ management training 
e. Other 

S4. How effective or ineffective would each of the following incentives be in 
encouraging disability non-discriminatory related training? (including ADA, disability 
employment, Rehab Act, EEOC guidance, 508 
Compliance) (Please circle one response for each item) 
(rating of 1 to 5, with 1 being very effective, 5 being very ineffective. 8 is don’t know)

a. Department reward/ recognition for receiving ADA training 1 2 3 4 5 8 
b. ADA training available on the internet 1 2 3 4 5 8 
c. Pay ADA training costs 1 2 3 4 5 8 
d. Make ADA/ Disability employment a mandatory element of management training 1 2 
3 4 5 8 
e. Other (Please specify ) 1 2 3 4 5 8 

2. Please indicate which of the following resources you have utilized to help resolve 
ADA issues and rate their degree of helpfulness. 
n If YES: how helpful was it? 
n If NO: why not? 
UTILIZED: Yes or no
If no: Not aware of this resource, aware but not needed, aware but not helpful
If yes: rated 1 to 5 with 1 being very helpful and 5 not helpful at all
Yes No If no: Why not? 

Sa. State vocational rehabilitation agencies, Disability 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 & Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, Local 
independent living centers or other disability organizations, or (toll-free number) 
c. Job Accommodation Network (toll-free number) 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
e. U. S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 (EEOC) 
f. Your agency's EEO office 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
g. Agency legal counsel 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
h. Your safety/ ergonomics staff 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
i. Disability management/ benefits staff 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
j. Union representative 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
k. Other Federal agencies or professional society or 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 business agency 
(e. g., OPM, MSPB, SHRM, IPMA) 
l. Dispute resolution center/ mediator 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
Sm. Disabilities Services Office 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
Sn. Selective Placement Coordinator 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
So. HR Staff/ Employee Relations 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 


3. Please indicate which of the following informational mediums you use to 
address your ADA/ disability employment 
issues and rate their degree of 
helpfulness. 

n If YES: how helpful was it? 
n If NO: why not? 
UTILIZED: Yes or no
If no: Not aware of this resource, aware but not needed, aware but not helpful
If yes: rated 1 to 5 with 1 being very helpful and 5 not helpful at all
Yes No If no: Why not? 

a. Print or video materials 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
b. Telephone consultation/ information hotline 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
c. On-site consultation/ training 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
d. Web sites/ list serve/ U. S. EEOC homepage 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
e. Organizational newsletter 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 
Sf. Government sponsored conferences such as 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 IDEAS (Interagency 
Disability Educational 
Awareness Showcase), Perspectives on Employment of Persons with Disabilities, FOSE 
(Federal Sectors Information Technology Fair) 
Sg. Employee sponsored disability organization in 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 your department/ 
agency 
f. Other (Please specify ) 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 

4. Does your agency have a return to work or disability management program for 
employees who are injured or become disabled? (Please circle one response) 
1 Yes, formal program with written policies/ procedures 
2 Yes, informal program with no formal written procedures 
3 No return to work/ disability management program Skip to S6 
4 Not familiar/ don't know if such a program exists 

5. To what extent has your agency's disability management program contributed to the 
following? 
(a great deal, somewhat, minimally, not at all, don’t know)

a. Your awareness of the accommodation process 1 2 3 4 8 
b. An organizational structure for providing accommodations 1 2 3 4 8 (i. e. centralized 
agency resource) 
c. Recognition of the importance of confidentiality of medical information 1 2 3 4 8 
d. Raising the acceptance of employees with disabilities by other employees 1 2 3 4 8 
S6. To what extent does your agency implement affirmative action and 1 2 3 4 8 
accommodation items for persons with disabilities as a measure of agency 
effectiveness? 

Section I: Presidential Orders 

S1.How helpful will each of the following be in implementing the technology 
nondiscrimination requirements of Section 508? (508 requires that electronic and 
information technology developed, procured, maintained, or used by 
the Federal government be accessible to people with disabilities.) 
(Rated 1 to 5, with 1 being very helpful and 5 not helpful at all. 8 is don’t know)

a. Centralized technology procurement which screens for these 1 2 3 4 5 8 
criteria 
b. Training procurement specialists in section 508 requirements 1 2 3 4 5 8 
c. Centralized technical assistance on technology accessibility 1 2 3 4 5 8 issues 
d. Unit specific expertise/ technical assistance on technology 1 2 3 4 5 8 accessibility 
issues 
e. The technical staff within your agency 1 2 3 4 5 8 (i. e. Chief Information Officer 
(CIO)/ Help Desk) 
f. Other (specify ) 1 2 3 4 5 8 

S2. Do you currently supervise any full-time employees who work primarily from home 
or another off-site location? 
1 Yes 2 No 

S3. In your opinion, could any of the office based full time positions you currently 
supervise be: 
a. Relocated to home-based or other off-site facilities: 
1 Yes 2 No 6 No relevant positions 

b. Split between home/ off-site location and office in a given week 
(i. e. 3 days/ week at home/ off-site, 2 days/ week in office): 
1 Yes 2 No 6 No relevant positions 

S4. How easy or difficult would it be for you to develop full time positions that could be: 
a. Performed from home or another off-site location 5 days/ week: 
1 Very Easy 2 Easy 3 Neither easy nor difficult 4 Difficult 5 Very difficult 
6 No relevant positions 8 Don't know 

b. Split between home/ off-site location and office in a given week 
(i. e. 3 days/ week at home/ off-site, 2 days/ week in office): 
1 Very Easy 2 Easy 3 Neither easy nor difficult 4 Difficult 5 Very difficult 
6 No relevant positions 8 Don't know 

If answer is "No relevant positions" for all questions S3a& b and S4a& b above, skip to 
S6. 

S5. How helpful would each of the following be to you as a supervisor in creating and 
supporting home-based or off-site/ flexiplace/ telecommuting? 
(Rated 1 to 5, with 1 being very helpful and 5 not helpful at all. 8 is don’t know)

a. Guidelines for supervision of off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
b. Training for supervisors of off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
c. Training for coworkers of off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
d. Initial and ongoing training for off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
e. Off-site technology support 1 2 3 4 58 
f. Guidelines for performance assessment of off-site workers 1 2 3 4 58 
g. Guidelines for the design of off-site work 1 2 3 4 58 
h. Formal flexiplace agreement between off-site 1 2 3 4 58 employee and supervisor 

S6. How easy or difficult would it be for you to accommodate an individual with a 
chronic illness or disability (for example: someone who has cancer treatment, physical 
therapy, dialysis, or mobility impaired 
employees) with the ability to work at home for 1-2 days a week or intermittently? 
1 Very Easy 2 Easy 3 Neither easy nor difficult 4 Difficult 5 Very difficult 
6 No relevant positions 8 Don't know 

S7. Are you aware of the July, 2000 Federal initiative (Executive Order 13163) that 
requires the Federal Government hiring of 100,000 qualified individuals with disabilities 
over the next 5 years? 
1 Yes 2 No (skip to S9) 

S8. To what extent has your agency's plan to implement this Executive Order influenced 
your recruitment and hiring practices? 
1 A great deal 2 Somewhat 3 Minimally 4 Not at all 8 Don't know 

S9. Are you aware of the EEOC Guidelines (2/ 13/ 01) for Federal agencies to implement 
Executive Order 13164, establishing written procedures to facilitate the provision of 
reasonable accommodation? 
1 Yes 2 No (skip to S11) 

S10. To what extent do these new accommodation procedures influence your supervisory 
practice? 
1 A great deal 2 Somewhat 3 Minimally 4 Not at all 8 Don't know 

S11. Are you aware of the July, 2000 Federal initiative (presidential memorandum) 
regarding telecommuting/ telework for individuals with significant disabilities? 
1 Yes 2 No 

6. Would you like a copy of the executive summary of the results of this study? 
1 Yes 2 No 


Please provide your information 
Name: 
Agency: 
Street address: 
City: 
State: Zip: 
Telephone: 
E-mail address 


Thank you for your assistance! 
If you have any questions, please contact 


Lisa Horn 
Telephone (toll-free): (888) 367-8404 
TDD: 607-255-2891 
Email: LLH5@ cornell. edu 


©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 


Appendix C: List of Agencies Participating in HR/EEO Survey

List of All Agencies Who Participated 
(columns are agency, frequency, percent, cumulative frequency, cumulative percent)

Administrative Office of the U. S. Courts, 1, 0.2, 1, 0.2
Agency for International Development, 1, 0.2, 2, 0.5
Agriculture, 22, 5.5, 24, 6.0 
Air Force, 10, 2.5, 34, 8.4
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, 1, 0.2, 35, 8.7
Army, 14, 3.5, 49, 12.2 
Central Intelligence Agency, 1, 0.2, 50, 12.4 
Commerce, 6, 1.5, 56, 13.9 
Commission on Civil Rights, 1, 0.2, 57, 14.1 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, 2, 0.5, 59, 14.6 
Congressional Budget Office, 1, 0.2, 60, 14.9 
Consumer Product Safety Commission, 2, 0.5, 62, 15.4 
Corporation for National Service, 2, 0.5, 64, 15.9 
Defense, 8, 2.0, 72, 17.9 
Defense Contract Audit Agency, 2, 0.5, 74, 18.4 
Defense Information Systems Agency, 2, 0.5, 76, 18.9 
Defense Intelligence Agency, 1, 0.2, 77, 19.1 
Defense Logistics Agency, 12, 3.0, 89, 22.1 
Defense Nuclear Facilities Board, 2, 0.5, 91, 22.6 
Defense Security Service, 1, 0.2, 92, 22.8 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency, 2, 0.5, 94, 23.3 
Education, 9, 2.2, 103, 25.6 
Energy, 14, 3.5, 117, 29.0 
Environmental Protection Agency, 19, 4.7, 136, 33.7 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 2, 0.5, 138, 34.2 
Executive Office of the President, 2, 0.5, 140, 34.7 
Export-Import Bank of the United States, 1, 0.2, 141, 35.0 
Farm Credit Administration, 2, 0.5, 143, 35.5 
Federal Communications Commission, 2, 0.5, 145, 36.0 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 7, 1.7, 152, 37.7 
Federal Election Commission, 1, 0.2, 153, 38.0 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, 9, 2.2, 162, 40.2 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 1, 0.2, 163, 40.4 
Federal Housing Finance Board, 1, 0.2, 164, 40.7 
Federal Labor Relations Authority, 1, 0.2, 165, 40.9 
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, 2, 0.5, 167, 41.4 
Federal Reserve System, 2, 0.5, 169, 41.9 
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board, 1, 0.2, 170, 42.2 
Federal Trade Commission, 2, 0.5, 172, 42.7 
Federal Maritime Commission, 2, 0.5, 174, 43.2 
General Services Administration, 3, 0.7, 177, 43.9 
Health & Human Services, 16, 4.0, 193, 47.9 
Housing & Urban Development, 2, 0.5, 195, 48.4 
Interior, 6, 1.5, 201, 49.9 
International Trade Commission, 1, 0.2, 202, 50.1 
Justice, 20, 5.0, 222, 55.1 
Labor, 11, 2.7, 233, 57.8 
Library of Congress, 1, 0.2, 234, 58.1 
Merit Systems Protection Board, 2, 0.5, 236, 58.6 
National Aeronautics & Space Administration, 17, 4.2, 253, 62.8 
National Archives & Records Administration, 2, 0.5, 255, 63.3 
National Endowment for the Arts, 1, 0.2, 256, 63.5 
National Endowment for the Humanities, 2, 0.5, 258, 64.0 
National Gallery of Art, 2, 0.5, 260, 64.5 
National Guard Bureau, 1, 0.2, 261, 64.8 
National Imagery & Mapping Agency, 1, 0.2, 262, 65.0 
National Labor Relations Board, 2, 0.5, 264, 65.5 
National Mediation Board, 1, 0.2, 265, 65.8 
National Science Foundation, 2, 0.5, 267, 66.3 
National Transportation Safety Board, 1, 0.2, 268, 66.5 
Navy, 49, 12.2, 317, 78.7 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 3, 0.7, 320, 79.4 
Occupational Safety & Health Review Commission, 2, 0.5, 322, 79.9
Office of Government Ethics, 2, 0.5, 324, 80.4 
Office of Personnel Management, 1, 0.2, 325, 80.6 
Office of Special Counsel, 1, 0.2, 326, 80.9 
Overseas Private Investment Corporation, 1, 0.2, 327, 81.1 
Peace Corps, 2, 0.5, 329, 81.6 
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 2, 0.5, 331, 82.1 
Postal Rate Commission, 2, 0.5, 333, 82.6 
Railroad Retirement Board, 3, 0.7, 336, 83.4 
Securities and Exchange Commission, 6, 1.5, 342, 84.9 
Selective Service System, 1, 0.2, 343, 85.1 
Small Business Administration, 2, 0.5, 345, 85.6 
Smithsonian Institution, 1, 0.2, 346, 85.9 
Social Security Administration, 16, 4.0, 362, 89.8 
Soldiers and Airmen's Home, 1, 0.2, 363, 90.1 
State, 2, 0.5, 365, 90.6 
Tax Court of the United States, 1, 0.2, 366, 90.8 
Tennessee Valley Authority, 1, 0.2, 367, 91.1 
The Architect of the Capitol, 2, 0.5, 369, 91.6 
Transportation, 15, 3.7, 384, 95.3 
Treasury, 2, 0.5, 386, 95.8 
U. S. General Accounting Office, 8, 2.0, 394, 97.8 
U. S. Information Agency, 2, 0.5, 396, 98.3 
Veterans Affairs, 6, 1.5, 402 99.8 
Voice of America, 1, 0.2, 403, 100.0 


Source: Disability Employment Policies and Practices in U. S. Federal Government 
Agencies. Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities/ Cornell 
University, 1999. 


Appendix D: List of Agencies Participating in Supervisor Survey

Department of Agriculture 
Total frequency: 80 
Total percent: 8% 
White Collar frequency52 
White collar percent: 6% 
Blue Collar Frequency: 28 
Blue Collar Percent: 15%

Department of Commerce 
Total frequency: 58
Total percent: 6%
White Collar frequency:38
White collar percent: 5%
Blue Collar Frequency: 20
Blue Collar Percent: 10%

Department of Education 
Total frequency: 53
Total percent: 55%
White Collar frequency:53
White collar percent: 7%
Blue Collar Frequency: 0
Blue Collar Percent: --

Department of Interior
Total frequency: 65
Total percent: 6%
White Collar frequency:46
White collar percent: 6%
Blue Collar Frequency: 19
Blue Collar Percent: 10%

Department of Justice 
Total frequency: 85	
Total percent: 8%
White Collar frequency:73
White collar percent: 9%
Blue Collar Frequency: 12
Blue Collar Percent: 6%

Department of Labor 
Total frequency: 51
Total percent: 5%
White Collar frequency:51
White collar percent: 6%
Blue Collar Frequency: 0
Blue Collar Percent: --

Department of Transportation 
Total frequency: 28
Total percent: 3%
White Collar frequency:22
White collar percent: 3%
Blue Collar Frequency: 6
Blue Collar Percent: 3%

Department of Treasury 
Total frequency: 108
Total percent: 11%
White Collar frequency:71
White collar percent: 9%
Blue Collar Frequency: 37
Blue Collar Percent: 19%

Department of Veteran’s Affairs
Total frequency: 101
Total percent: 10%
White Collar frequency:70
White collar percent: 9%
Blue Collar Frequency: 31
Blue Collar Percent: 16%

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
Total frequency: 51
Total percent: 5%
White Collar frequency:51
White collar percent: 6%
Blue Collar Frequency: 0
Blue Collar Percent: --

Federal Communications Commission 
Total frequency: 50
Total percent: 5%
White Collar frequency:50
White collar percent: 6%
Blue Collar Frequency: 0
Blue Collar Percent: --

Health and Human Services 
Total frequency: 60
Total percent: 6%
White Collar frequency:41
White collar percent: 5%
Blue Collar Frequency: 19
Blue Collar Percent: 10%

Housing and Urban Development 
Total frequency: 53
Total percent: 5%
White Collar frequency:53
White collar percent: 7%
Blue Collar Frequency: 0
Blue Collar Percent: --

National Council on Disability
Total frequency: 1
Total percent: 0%
White Collar frequency:1
White collar percent: 0%
Blue Collar Frequency: 0
Blue Collar Percent: --

Office of Personnel Management 
Total frequency: 50
Total percent: 5%
White Collar frequency:50
White collar percent: 6%
Blue Collar Frequency: 0
Blue Collar Percent: --

Small Business Administration 
Total frequency: 52
Total percent: 5%
White Collar frequency:52
White collar percent: 6%
Blue Collar Frequency: 0
Blue Collar Percent: --

Social Security Administration 55 5% 36 4% 19 10%
Total frequency: 55
Total percent: 5%
White Collar frequency:36
White collar percent: 4%
Blue Collar Frequency: 19
Blue Collar Percent: 10%

Appendix E: HR/EEO Respondent Demographics

Organization Size at Location 
(columns are Number of employees, percentage of all respondents)

0-14, 2% 
15-25, 1 
26-50, 2 
51-249, 16 
250-499, 6 
500-1499, 22 
1500-2499, 13 
2500-3499, 6 
3500-4999, 7 
5000+, 23 
Refused, 1 


Title of Respondent 
(columns are title, percentage of all respondents)

Director/ Chief, 41% 
Deputy Assistant Secretary, 2
Deputy Director, 4 
Personnel Manager, 18
Officer, 9
Specialist, 10 
Program Co-ordinator, 3
Other, 13
Don't Know, 0
Refused, 0


Level of Organization Where Reporting From 
(columns are level, percent of all respondents)

Entire agency (including regions), 49% 
Headquarters only, 9 
Regional only, 40 
Refused, 2 


Function of Respondent 
(columns are function, percent of all respondents)
** means Less than one percent 

Administrative, 9% 
Equal Opportunity, 35 
Benefits , 0 
Compensation,  0 
Disability, 3 
Diversity, 1 
Employee Relations, 1 
Employment/ Recruitment, 2 
Health/ Safety/ Security, 0 
Human Resources (HR), 41 
Labor/ Industrial Relations, ** 
Legal, ** 
Organizational Development, 0 
Training & Development, 0 
Other, 8 
Don't Know, 0 
Refused, 0 


Number of Years with Organization 
(columns are range of years, percent of all respondents)
<2, 6 
2-5, 16 
6-10, 20 
11-20, 30 
20+ 29, 

Appendix F: Supervisor Respondent Demographics

How many Years with Agency
1-5 years: 6%
6-10: 11%
11-15: 19%
16-20: 14%
21 or more years: 51%
Note: percent of all respondents, n = 1001.
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.


Years as Federal Supervisor
1-5 years: 27%
6-10: 22%
11-15: 21%
16-20+: 15%
21 or more years: 14%
Note: percent of all respondents, n = 1001.
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

Federal General Schedule Grade (or equivalent)
4 or below 12%
5-8 :10%
9-12: 21%
13-15: 56%
Note: percent of all respondents, n = 1001.
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

Number of Total Supervisees
1-10 supervisees: 43%
11-20: 25%
21-90: 25%
90+ supervisees 7%
Note: percent of all respondents, n = 1001.
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.


Number of Immediate Supervisees
1-6 immediate supervisees: 36%
7-12: 33%
12+: 31%
Note: percent of all respondents, n = 1001.
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

Number of Supervisees with Disabilities in the Past Five Years
None 40%
1-2: 40%
3-4: 11%
5-10: 6%
11 or more: 3%
Note: percent of all respondents, n = 1001.
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

Number of Accommodation Requests Received in the Past Five years as a Federal 
Supervisor
None: 50%
1-2 requests: 29%
3-4: 10%
5-10: 8%
11 or more requests: 3%
Note: percent of all respondents, n = 1001.
Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.

Appendix G: Additional Resources

Appendix D: Additional Resources 

1) Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) 
Department of Labor
Frances Perkins Building
200 Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20210 
Phone: (V) 202-693-7880 
(TTY) 202-693-7881 
(FAX) 202-693-7888 
Website: www. dol. gov/ odep/ 

ODEP sponsors: 
The New Freedom Initiative: DisabilityInfo
Website: www. disabilityinfo.gov/ 

2) President's Committee Job Accommodation Network (JAN) 
918 Chestnut Ridge Road, Suite 1 
West Virginia University- PO Box 6080 
Morgantown, WV 26506-6080 
Phone: (V) 800-526-7234 
(TTY) 800-232-9675 
Website: www. dol.gov/odep and click on JAN or go directly to JAN at 
janweb. icdi. wvu. edu/ english/ homeus. htm 

3) Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
1801 L Street NW (Federal Sector Programs) 
Washington, DC 20507 
Phone: (V) 800-669-3362 
(TTY) 800-800-3302 
Website: www. eeoc. gov 
For specific Federal employment questions, call the "ATTORNEY OF THE DAY" at 
202-663-4599. 

4) Department of Labor: Office of Federal Contractor Compliance Programs (OFCCP) 
Department of Labor 
Frances Perkins Building 
200 Constitution Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20210 
Phone: (V) 888-376-3227 
(V) 202-219-9475 
(TTY) 202-208-0452 
Website: www. dol. gov/ esa/ 

5) U. S. Office of Personnel Management (for Federal employment information) 
1900 E Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20415 
Phone: (V) 202-606-2700 
(TTY) 912-744-2299 
Website: www. opm. gov 

©2002 Cornell University Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations -- Extension Division, S. Bruyère 


