Leave Rights under the FMLA and the ADA: The Intersection of Two Laws Impacting Employee Leave


Introduction

The following discussion will provide a basic overview 
of employee and employer rights involving leave under 
both the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 
(FMLA) and Title I of the Americans with Disabilities 
Act of 1990 (ADA).  The discussion will then focus on 
the areas where the two laws intersect, providing both 
overlapping and distinctive protections and obligations.

Overview of ADA Leave Protections

Title I of the ADA, which is enforced by the U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), 
protects qualified individuals with disabilities from 
discrimination on the basis of disability.   Under the 
ADA, employers are required to provide necessary 
reasonable accommodations unless doing so would 
impose an undue hardship on the employer.  A 
"reasonable accommodation" is a change in the 
workplace that enables an employee to perform the 
essential functions of his/her job. Leave is one form of 
reasonable accommodation in that it enables an 
employee to take time off from work, take care of 
whatever required the leave, and return to work and to 
the performance of the job's essential functions.

In some cases, leave on a short term, long term, or even 
hourly basis, will be the only effective accommodation.  
 In other situations, leave may be an effective 
accommodation, but there may also be other effective 
accommodations that will allow the person to stay on 
the job.  Under the ADA, the employer, preferably in 
conjunction with the individual requesting the 
accommodation, makes the final decision of what 
effective reasonable accommodation will be provided. 

Overview of FMLA Requirements 

Coverage and Eligibility

The FMLA allows employees to balance their work 
and family life by taking up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-
protected leave for certain family and medical reasons, 
while at the same time accommodating the legitimate 
interests of employers.   The FMLA applies to all:

*  state, local and federal employers, and local 
education agencies (schools), and
*  private sector employers who employ 50 or more 
employees for at least 20 workweeks in the current 
or preceding calendar year, including joint 
employers and successor employers. 

The U.S. Department of Labor's Employment 
Standards Administration, Wage and Hour Division, 
enforces the FMLA for private, state and local 
government and some federal employees.  Most federal 
and congressional employees are subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Office of Personnel Management or 
Congress.

To be eligible for FMLA leave, an employee must work 
for a covered employer and:

1.	have worked for that employer for at least 12 
months; and 

2.	have worked at least 1,250 hours during the 12 
months prior to the start of the FMLA leave; 
and, 

3.	work at a location where at least 50 employees 
are employed at the location or within 75 miles 
of the location. 

All time worked counts towards the 12 months of 
employment requirement.  The 1,250 hours requirement 
can be satisfied in different ways, including regular 
fulltime work, working 104 hours per month for 12 
months, or working 24 hours per week for 52 weeks.

Leave Entitlement 
A covered employer must grant an eligible employee up 
to a total of 12 workweeks of unpaid leave in a 12-
month period for one or more of the following reasons:

*  for the birth of a son or daughter, and to care for 
the newborn child; 
*  the placement of a child with the employee through 
adoption or foster care, and to care for the child; 
*  to care for an immediate family member (spouse, 
child, or parent -- but not a parent "in-law") with a 
serious health condition; and 
*  when the employee is unable to work because of a 
serious health condition. 

Leave to care for a newborn child or for a newly-
placed child must conclude within 12 months after the 
birth or placement.  Spouses employed by the same 
employer are jointly entitled to a combined total of 12 
workweeks of family leave for the birth or placement of 
a child and its related care, and to care for an 
employee's parent who has a serious health condition. 

Definition of Serious Health Condition
"Serious health condition" means an illness, injury, 
impairment, or physical or mental condition that 
involves:

*  any period of incapacity or treatment connected 
with inpatient care (i.e., an overnight stay) in a 
hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility;
*  a period of incapacity requiring absence of more 
than three calendar days from work, school, or 
other regular daily activities that also involves 
continuing treatment by (or under the supervision 
of) a health care provider;  
*  any period of incapacity due to pregnancy, or for 
prenatal care;  
*  any period of incapacity (or treatment therefore) 
due to a chronic serious health condition (e.g., 
asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, etc.);  
*  a period of incapacity that is permanent or long-
term due to a condition for which treatment may not 
be effective (e.g., Alzheimer's, stroke, terminal 
diseases, etc.); or, 
*  any absences to receive multiple treatments 
(including related recovery periods) by, or on 
referral by, a health care provider for a condition 
that likely would result in incapacity of more than 
three consecutive days if left untreated (e.g., 
chemotherapy, physical therapy, dialysis, etc.). 

Intermittent/Reduced Schedule Leave

The FMLA permits employees to take leave on an 
intermittent basis (i.e., from time-to-time) or to work a 
reduced schedule (e.g., a four-day week or a six-hour 
day) under certain circumstances, including to care for a 
seriously ill family member, or because of the 
employee's serious health condition. 
Intermittent/reduced schedule leave may be taken to 
care for a newborn or newly placed child only with the 
employer's approval. 

Employees needing intermittent/reduced schedule leave 
for foreseeable medical treatment must work with their 
employers to schedule the leave so as not to unduly 
disrupt the employer's operations, subject to the 
approval of the employee's health care provider.  In 
such cases, the employer may transfer the employee 
temporarily to an alternative job with equivalent pay and 
benefits that accommodates recurring periods of leave 
better than the employee's regular job.

Use of Paid Leave 
Employees may choose to use, or employers may 
require the employee to use, accrued paid leave to 
cover some or all of the FMLA leave taken. Employees 
may choose, or employers may require, the substitution 
of accrued paid vacation or personal leave for any of 
the situations covered by FMLA. The substitution of 
accrued sick or family leave is limited by the employer's 
policies governing the use of such leave.



Notification and Certification
Employees may be required to give 30 days notice of 
the need to take FMLA leave when the need is 
foreseeable.  An employer may require that a leave 
request for a serious health condition of the employee 
or the employee's immediate family member be 
supported by a certification issued by a health care 
provider.  There is an approved Department of Labor 
form for this purpose.  The employer may not make a 
broad request for medical records.  

Return- to-Work

Upon return from FMLA leave, an employee must be 
restored to his\her original job, or to an "equivalent" 
job, which means virtually identical to the original job in 
terms of pay, benefits, and other employment terms and 
conditions.  In addition, an employee's use of FMLA 
leave cannot result in the loss of any employment benefit 
that the employee earned or was entitled to before using 
FMLA leave.  Under limited circumstances, an 
employer may refuse to reinstate certain highly-paid, 
salaried "key" employees where doing so would cause 
"substantial and grievous economic injury" to its 
operations.

When is There Overlapping Coverage Between 
the ADA and the FMLA?

Private employers with 50 or more employees are 
covered by both the FMLA and the ADA.  State and 
local government employers are also covered by both 
the FMLA and the ADA, regardless of the number of 
employees.  Qualified individuals with disabilities 
covered under the ADA must also meet the FMLA 
qualification requirements of at least 12 months of total 
employment and at least 1250 hours worked in the 
prior 12 months to be eligible for FMLA leave.  

Is an FMLA "Serious Health Condition" the same 
as an ADA Disability?"

Not necessarily.  An ADA disability is an impairment 
that substantially limits one or more major life activities, 
a record of such an impairment, or being regarded as 
having such an impairment.  Some FMLA serious heath 
conditions, such as most cancers, heart disease, and 
serious strokes, likely would also be ADA disabilities.  
Other conditions, such as pregnancy, an 
appendectomy, or a routine broken leg, may be serious 
health conditions, but generally would not meet the 
ADA definition of disability.  

Similarly, a record of a serious health condition may or 
may not qualify as a record of disability.  Likewise, just 
because the employer knows that someone has a 
serious health condition does not mean that the 
employer necessarily regards him/her as having an ADA 
disability.

Are FMLA Certification Inquiries Permissible 
Under the ADA?

Yes.  When an employee requests leave under the 
FMLA for a serious health condition, employers will not 
violate the ADA by asking for information specified in 
the FMLA certification form.  An employer has a right 
to know why an employee, who would otherwise be at 
work, is requesting time off under the FMLA.  This 
type of narrow inquiry would be job-related and 
consistent with business necessity under the ADA.

An employer may keep a single medical file, which must 
be kept separate from the regular personnel file that 
contains both FMLA and ADA information, as long as 
ADA confidentiality standards are met.

General Comparison of ADA and FMLA Leave
The FMLA allows for a maximum of 12 work-weeks 
of unpaid leave in a 12-month period.  A qualified 
individual with a disability would be entitled to more 
than 12 weeks of unpaid leave as a reasonable 
accommodation if the leave would not impose an undue 
hardship on the employer's business.  

The FMLA allows the 12 weeks of leave to be taken 
intermittently or in the form of a reduced work schedule 
(for example, a three-day week instead of a five-day 
week until the 12 weeks are used up).  The FMLA also 
allows the employer to require the employee to transfer 
to an alternative job with equivalent pay and benefits 
while the leave is being utilized.

Under the ADA, a qualified individual with a disability 
may work part-time or take occasional time off so long 
as it does not impose an undue hardship on the 
employer.  If, or when, it does impose an undue 
hardship, the employer must attempt to reassign the 
employee to a vacant equivalent position, and as a last 
resort, to a vacant lower position so that the leave or 
reduced schedule could be continued.  Of course, the 
employer and employee are always free to agree on a 
voluntary transfer to a different position if both parties 
deem this preferable to accommodating the person in 
his/her current position.  

Keep in mind that a qualified individual with a disability 
who is using FMLA leave to work reduced hours may 
also need a reasonable accommodation (e.g., special 
equipment) to perform an essential function of the job.

When the Employer Wants to Keep the Employee 
On the Job

Under the ADA, an employer may offer an employee a 
reasonable accommodation other than the leave that has 
been requested, as long as it is effective.  For example, 
an employer may offer special equipment, an 
opportunity to work reduced hours in the employee's 
current job, or a temporary assignment to another job, 
if these are effective accommodations.  

However, if the individual is eligible for FMLA leave 
and has a serious health condition that prevents him/her 
from performing an essential job function, s/he has the 
right to take a leave of up to 12 workweeks in 12 
months, even if s/he could continue working with a 
reasonable accommodation.  While the FMLA does 
not prevent an employee form accepting an alternative 
to leave, the acceptance must be voluntary and 
uncoerced.



Return to Work
Under the ADA, the employee is entitled to return to 
the same job unless the employer demonstrates that 
holding the job open would impose an undue hardship.  
In this situation, reassignment to another position would 
have to be considered as discussed above.  
Reassignment would also need to be attempted if the 
person upon returning to work is  no longer able to 
perform the essential functions of his/her original 
position even with reasonable accommodations.  

Under the FMLA, the individual may be returned to the 
same or an equivalent position, which means a position 
that is virtually identical in terms of pay, benefits, and 
other employment terms and conditions.  If an 
employee cannot perform the essential functions of this 
job or the equivalent position, the FMLA does not 
require reassignment to another job. 

Insurance Coverage  

Under the ADA, the employer must continue health 
insurance coverage for an employee taking leave or 
working part-time only if the employer also provides 
coverage for other employees in the same leave or part-
time status.  Under the FMLA, an employer always 
must maintain the employee's existing level of coverage 
under a group health plan during the FMLA leave, 
provided the employee pays his/her share of the 
premiums.  Other benefits, such as life or disability 
insurance, must also be provided to the person taking 
FMLA leave if the benefits are provided to others in the 
same leave or part-time status.

Complying with both the FMLA and the ADA 

If an employee requests time off for a reason related or 
possibly related to disability (for example, a request for 
six weeks off to get treatment for a back problem), the 
employer should consider this a request for ADA 
reasonable accommodation as well as FMLA leave.  
However, if the employee makes it clear that they only 
want FMLA leave, the employer should not make 
additional inquiries related to ADA coverage.

When both the ADA and the FMLA apply to an 
employee's initial 12 weeks of medical leave, the 
FMLA rule provides that an employer must provide 
leave under whichever provision provides greater rights 
to the employee.  

Example:  A qualified individual with a disability who is 
also an "eligible employee" entitled to FMLA leave 
requests 10 weeks of medical leave as a reasonable 
accommodation, which the employer grants because it 
is not an undue hardship. The employer advises the 
employee that the 10 weeks of leave is also being 
designated as FMLA leave and will count towards the 
employee's FMLA leave entitlement. This designation 
does not prevent the parties from also treating the leave 
as a reasonable accommodation and reinstating the 
employee into the same job, which is the greater right 
required by the ADA, rather than an equivalent position 
under FMLA.  At the same time, the employee would 
be entitled under FMLA to have the employer maintain 
group health plan coverage during the leave, as that 
requirement provides the greater right to the employee. 
 
Family Leave

The FMLA requires an employer to grant leave for the 
employee to care for his/her spouse, child, or parent 
with a serious health condition.  The ADA's reasonable 
accommodation requirement does not require an 
employer to give an employee time off to care for a 
family member with a disability.  Of course, when an 
employer opts to offer family leave as an employee 
benefit, the employer must provide the leave in a non-
discriminatory manner. 



FMLA Information or Complaints

For additional information about the FMLA or to file an 
FMLA complaint, individuals should contact the nearest 
office of the Wage and Hour Division, Employment 
Standards Administration, U.S. Department of Labor.  
The Wage and Hour Division is listed in most telephone 
directories under U.S. Government, U.S. Department 
of Labor.  For on-line information go to: 
http://www.dol.gov/esa.fmla.htm

ADA Information and Charges
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
1801 L Street, NW
Washington, DC  20507

To be connected to the nearest field office for 
information or to file a charge, call (800) 669-4000 
(voice), (800) 669-6820 (TTD). To order publications, 
call (800) 669-3362 (voice), (800) 800-3302 (TDD).  
For on-line information, go to: http://www.eeoc.gov

Other ADA Resources
 
ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline
 (800) 949-4232 (voice/TDD).

Job Accommodation Network
918 Chestnut Ridge Road, Suite 1, Morgantown, WV 
26506-6080, 
(800) ADA-WORK (voice/TDD).

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It was written by Sheila D. Duston, an 
attorney/mediator practicing in the Washington, D.C. 
metropolitan area, in September, 2001. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment 
and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-
Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant 
from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for 
accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of 
the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  
The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in 
its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification 
of various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  
Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing 
and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  
http://www.eeoc.gov 

Other brochures on the ADA produced by 
the Program on Employment and 
Disability
Are available on-line at  
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada


  The EEOC's ADA regulations are set forth at 29 C.F.R. Part 
1630. 
 A modification or adjustment satisfies the reasonable 
accommodation obligation if it is "effective." Leave may be the 
only effective accommodation where the employee needs time 
off to obtain medical treatment, recuperate from an illness or an 
episodic manifestation of a disability, repair a wheelchair or 
other device, and so forth.
  The Department of Labor's FMLA regulations are set forth 
at 29 C.F.R. Part 825.

Leave Rights under the FMLA and the ADA: The Intersection of Two Laws Impacting Employee Leave


July 2001	CORNELL UNIVERSITY
