The Role of Disability Management Programs in ADA Compliance 


What is disability management?

When employees leave work as the result of a disabling 
injury or illness, it is not simply a matter of adding up the 
medical bills and income replacement costs to 
determine the impact of disability on the workplace - 
knowledge and experience are lost, workplace 
efficiency decreases, customer relationships suffer, and 
productivity declines.  In fact, the Census Bureau 
estimates that the total medical, income replacement, 
and productivity-related costs of disability will top $340 
billion in the year 2000 , a fact many companies have 
begun to take very seriously.  In times of tight labor 
markets, no employer can afford to lose even one 
valued employee due to poorly managed health or 
disability.

The field of disability management (DM), which was 
born of employer efforts to control disability costs 
beginning in the mid-1980's, has undergone 
unprecedented change and growth since then due at 
least in part to the passage of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990.  "Disability 
management is a workplace prevention and remediation 
strategy that seeks to prevent disability from occurring 
or, lacking that, to intervene early following the onset of 
a disability, using coordinated, cost-conscious, quality 
case management and rehabilitation services that reflect 
an organizational commitment to continued employment 
of those experiencing functional work limitations."   This 
definition, which first appeared in a 1992 text on 
disability management, is still applicable today although 
the scope of services and interventions that can help to 
manage and minimize the impact of disabling injuries 
and illness on the individual and on the organization has 
expanded exponentially.

The concept of DM is a simple one - connect all the 
individual care, benefit, and case management 
components so they complement each other.  In its 
simplest form, integrated disability management 
coordinates occupational and non-occupational 
disability benefits and absence and paid leave programs 
with a focus on early return to work.  Increasingly, DM 
programs also coordinate health care, employee 
assistance (EAP) and behavioral health care, health 
promotion, disease management, and medical case 
management services all aimed at improving overall 
workforce health, easing the administrative burden, and 
providing a seamless set of benefits for workers with 
disabling injuries and illnesses.  

Integration of DM program functions becomes 
complex, however, given the scope of programs, 
policies, and practices to be integrated: data 
management from multiple internal and external sources; 
education of health care providers; management of 
multiple vendors for case management, insurance (or 
self-insured administration), health care, and 
rehabilitation services; and, last but not least, training 
front-line supervisors in the intricacies of managing 
return to work.  Every organization's situation is 
different and no single integration model will work well 
for every company.  But all organizations must be 
mindful of the reasonable accommodation requirements 
of the ADA in designing and implementing return-to-
work policies and programs for their employees with 
disabilities.  

How have DM programs grown and developed?

Disability management programs have been utilized 
increasingly over the past decade by businesses seeking 
to control the cost of workplace disability.  The 
Washington Business Group on Health, in collaboration 
with human resources consulting firm, Watson Wyatt 
Worldwide, has surveyed large employers since 1996 
regarding their DM program activities and concerns.  
The most recent survey results indicate that 43% of 
large corporations have implemented some form of 
integrated DM program, up from 23% in 1996.   As 
the number of programs has increased, so too have 
corporate expectations of DM program efforts.  In 
1996, most companies responding to the "Staying @ 
Work" survey indicated that increased frequency of 
return-to-work outcomes and reduced benefit costs 
were the primary measures of program success.  
However, by 1999, businesses reported that improved 
customer satisfaction, reduced absenteeism, and 
increased productivity were also being tracked to 
determine if DM program efforts had a positive impact 
on overall business success.

This bottom line orientation to measuring DM program 
effectiveness encompassed ADA compliance once the 
Title I provisions were implemented in 1992 as many 
corporations recognized the importance of reasonable 
accommodation as the key to early return to work as 
well as reduced liability for discrimination.  One large 
financial institution reorganized its human resources 
departments in 1993 so that ADA compliance efforts, 
previously a part of its equal employment opportunity 
program, became the responsibility of the disability 
management department, which also coordinated 
occupational and non-occupational return-to-work 
efforts.   Many large companies have recognized that 
the reasonable accommodation process mandated by 
the ADA requires essentially the same analysis of work 
limitations and modified work options as typical 
transitional return-to-work programs . Thus, its DM 
program is ideally positioned to address both temporary 
and permanent work return issues.

In addition to addressing return to work following 
injuries or illnesses, DM programs have also begun to 
collaborate with corporate health promotion and 
disease management efforts in order to reduce the 
incidence of preventable health conditions and intervene 
early with chronic illnesses and to teach self 
management skills and reduce acute episodes requiring 
additional time off work.  As the workforce ages, the 
incidence of disability among the employed population 
is expected to rise thereby challenging employers to 
maintain maximum workplace flexibility and to 
accommodate the needs of older workers by providing, 
for example, assistive technology, flexible schedules, 
and telecommuting options.  



Employee assistance programs (EAP) have also begun 
to partner with DM programs to identify employees 
with mental health problems who can benefit from 
reasonable accommodation of work limitations 
associated with these types of disorders.  Mental health 
disorders are typically considered by employers to be 
the most difficult types of disabilities to accommodate.  
Recent research indicates that structuring benefit plans 
to provide more generous behavioral health coverage 
often saves money by reducing the overall cost 
associated with lost work days.   Thus, integrated DM 
approaches to managing behavioral health problems in 
the workplace rely on reasonable accommodation 
efforts to return employees with mental health related 
disabilities to work in order to demonstrate a return on 
investment for the cost of more expansive, and more 
expensive, mental health treatment options.  The cost of 
such treatment is usually more than offset by the gains in 
workplace productivity by returning employees with 
psychiatric disabilities to work.

What are the primary DM functions that intersect 
with ADA compliance?

The primary areas of DM practice that intersect with or 
bear on ADA compliance include:

1.	Benefits access: Many DM programs coordinate 
access for employees to disability/income 
replacement benefits.  When an employee is injured 
or becomes ill, he/she is directed to the DM 
program to determine which of the often multiple 
disability benefit option offerings (sick leave, salary 
continuance, workers' compensation, short term or 
long term disability, retirement disability, etc.) may 
be appropriate.  A single point of contact (such as 
"800" phone lines) often serves to assure that 
employees working in 24-hour operations or in 
widely dispersed locations around the country or 
around the world can quickly access benefits to 
which they are entitled once they become disabled. 
 On-line enrollment and application processes have 
also evolved over the past several years to serve 
the needs of an increasingly computer-dependent 
and networked workforce.  Such operations also 
serve as data collection points for absence and 
disability information used by companies to 
determine if DM efforts have the desired impact, 
i.e., reduce lost time and improve return-to-work 
outcomes.

Compliance with ADA Titles I and III can be 
enhanced through centralized benefit and absence 
management efforts.  Employees are assured 
immediate and seamless access to benefits through 
personal contact, phone lines, or on-line 
connections.  Plan descriptions and information are 
also readily available if questions concerning 
coverage arise.  Fast and efficient leave and benefits 
processing means that return to work and 
accommodation efforts begin as soon as medically 
feasible.  

2.	Identification of essential job functions: The ADA 
states that an individual with a disability must be 
qualified to perform the "essential job functions" of 
the position which he/she holds or seeks in order to 
seek reasonable accommodation.  The essential job 
functions of a position are the foundation upon 
which DM staff evaluate the qualifications of 
employees with disabilities and determine what, if 
any, reasonable accommodation options exist.  An 
essential job function is a set of tasks that comprises 
the most important activities of a job - they are not 
job skills, individual job tasks, or job descriptions.  
Thus, in making return-to-work recommendations, 
a DM staff person must determine what the 
essential job functions are that must be 
accomplished in order for modified work to be 
successful and productive.

3.	Clarification of work limitations: DM programs 
serve a critical function linking physicians, 
employees with disabilities, and the company in 
developing return-to-work plans.  Typically, 
companies employ nurse/case managers (either 
internally or externally contracted) to communicate 
with treating physicians regarding recuperation and 
return to work for employees with disabilities.  
Their job is to assure that employees receive 
appropriate, timely treatment and that any resulting 
work limitations are stated unambiguously, clearly, 
and in such a manner as to facilitate the modified 
work/return-to-work process.  Even before issues 
of permanent accommodation arise, transitional job 
assignments must take into consideration the nature 
and extent of limitations experienced by employees 
recovering from injuries or illnesses.  Should 
limitations persist, employer DM efforts to verify 
and understand restrictions as they change over 
time places the company in a stronger position to 
develop permanent reasonable accommodations 
under the ADA when and if that becomes 
necessary.

4.	Development of modified job, return-to-work 
options: The heart of DM is facilitating an 
employee's return to work as soon as medically 
appropriate.  Not only does the employer regain the 
services of a trained employee, but being back in 
the work environment often further speeds recovery 
for employees with disabilities.  Non-discrimination 
under the ADA is also achieved by providing 
reasonable accommodation for disability-related 
limitations that restrict employees' ability to work.  
Most companies develop human resource policies 
and supervisory training materials to reinforce and 
support the return-to-work process with guidance 
from the DM program staff.

Return-to-work/accommodation options include 
transitional work (temporary changes in job duties 
or techniques during periods of recuperation); 
modified work (changes in work tasks, schedules, 
methods, or equipment); or alternate work 
(reassignment to a different job if accommodations 
cannot be made in the original position).  Typically, 
DM staff follow the reasonable accommodation 
process (even if restrictions are expected to be 
temporary) in order to make appropriate return-to-
work decisions.  First, DM staff analyze the job and 
determine the essential job functions.  Then, they 
identify and clarify any disability-related restrictions, 
and generate a set of return-to-work options that 
appear to meet the work restriction needs of the 
employee with a disability.  Finally, DM staff select 
the option that best balances the employee's needs 
and the company's expectations for productive 
work assignment and their business needs.  

5.	Interactive dialogue: Engaging employees with 
disabilities in meaningful discussion of their work 
options is a basic tenet of the ADA.  Courts have 
found in favor of ADA plaintiffs/employees whose 
employers have attempted to impose 
accommodation options without having first had an 
interactive dialogue with them to assure their 
understanding and gain their agreement with 
accommodation plans.  But beyond simply avoiding 
lawsuits, engaging employees in the return-to-work 
process makes good sense.  Supervisors must feel 
comfortable that they understand the nature of an 
employee's work limitations.  Both ultimately must 
have a stake in the success of any modified return-
to-work plans and the earlier a dialogue between 
them can begin after an employee's disability 
becomes evident, the better.  DM program staff 
provide the link between employees, physicians, 
and line supervisors to facilitate this discussion and 
resolve any issues that arise in the course of 
developing a return-to-work plan.






The following is a table representing how disability management functions contribute to ADA compliance



DM Program Functions

ADA Compliance Impact

Transitional/modified return to work

Aids reasonable accommodation
*essential job function analysis
* identification of job accommodation options
* identification of job aids, assistive devices

Benefits coordination, occupational and 
non-occupational disability

Ensures equal access to benefits (Title III)

Benefits application processing

Ensures equal and timely access to benefits

Case management

Aids reasonable accommodation
* clarification of work limitations
* identification of job accommodation options

Internal disability management process

Aids reasonable accommodation
* provides mechanism for evaluating/funding 
accommodations
* promotes interactive dialog

Independent medical exams

Aids reasonable accommodation
* clarification of work limitations

Education of supervisors, physicians 
regarding return-to-work process

Promotes interactive dialog

Safety and illness prevention 

Aids reasonable accommodation
* identification of job aids, assistive devices 
(particularly ergonomic)



How can DM programs assure ADA 
compliance?

A Cornell University survey (conducted with the 
Washington Business Group on Health, the Society 
for Human Resources Management, and the Federal 
government)  provides a comprehensive assessment 
of both private and public sector organizational 
responses to the provisions of the ADA.  Forty-five 
per cent of private sector employers (and 42% of 
government agencies) indicated that they have 
established formal DM/return-to-work programs and 
another 34% of private sector employers (and 24% of 
government agencies) stated that they had "informal" 
programs.  An additional set of questions details the 
intersection between DM programs, among those 
organizations reporting that they had them, and ADA 
compliance by asking employers what contribution 
their DM programs had made to improving ADA 
compliance.  The results:

* 89% of private sector companies (and 85% of 
federal sector agencies) said that DM programs 
reinforced the importance of confidentiality.  
Given rising concerns about Internet privacy and 
medical confidentiality, it is an encouraging sign 
that DM programs help to create an atmosphere 
that protects employee privacy while at the same 
time working to accommodate employees with 
disabilities.

* 88% of private sector organizations (and 73% of 
federal government agencies) credit DM 
programs with raising acceptance of employees 
with disabilities in the workplace.  The full 
inclusion of people with disabilities is a central 
theme of the ADA, and DM programs have 
advanced that aim in the workplace by supporting 
practices that normalize return to work and 
embed the reasonable accommodation process in 
organizational life. 

* 87% of private sector companies (and 75% of 
federal sector agencies) found that DM programs 
raised supervisor awareness of the 
accommodation process.  Employers report they 
have completed staff training on a wide variety of 
disability and return-to-work related topics most 
of which involve or are influenced by DM 
program staff.

* 79% of public sector employers (and 71% of 
public sector organizations) create an 
organizational structure for funding 
accommodations through their DM programs.  
Many companies have developed central 
accommodation funds that pay for worksite 
modifications above a predetermined ceiling 
(usually several hundred dollars).  This reduces 
the impact of any expensive accommodations on 
small department budgets while providing a 
convenient means to track the provision of 
accommodation services company-wide.  

In order to assure consistent application of reasonable 
accommodation principles, DM programs have 
developed organization-wide communications 
concerning the importance of return to work.  Such 
policies create a "return-to-work culture" that 
encourages cooperation and flexibility in developing 
return-to-work options for employees with disabilities 
and reduces "entitlement mentality," a tendency for 
employees to feel that disability leave is an entitlement 
(like paid vacation leave).  Before DM programs 
became widespread, employers were often unwitting 
"co-malingerers," enabling and even encouraging 
employees with even minor ailments to stay off work 
until they were "100% recovered."  Now, such 
behavior is viewed as not only counterproductive 
(since it runs counter to the early return to 
work/productivity perspective) but is proscribed by 
the ADA.

What does the future hold?

Can businesses comply with the ADA and contain 
disability costs at the same time?  In fact, cost 
containment and compliance go hand-in-hand.  
"Doing the right thing" also facilitates return to work, 
which, in turn, is correlated with reduced workplace 
disability costs.  Although recent Supreme Court 
cases have begun to define the limits of ADA 
coverage, there are concerns that unreasonable 
expansion of ADA provisions may undermine the 
generally positive perception that businesses hold of 
the law.  This need not be the case, however, because 
businesses have every incentive to continue to expand 
on DM program successes of the past decade.

As more companies realize the benefits of active 
return-to-work/DM programs, acceptance of people 
with disabilities in the workplace will increase. As 
employers experiment with more expansive employee 
health benefit programs designed to improve chronic 
illness management, former Social Security Disability 
Insurance recipients may find the workplace a more 
secure and inviting alternative under the Ticket to 
Work/Work Incentives Improvement Act.  DM 
efforts to improve return-to-work outcomes will 
ultimately result in greater workplace flexibility and 
reduced benefit costs, generally, which, in turn, will 
pave the way for improved employment prospects for 
people with disabilities.  And in the high-need, high 
tech employment arena, assistive technology will 
continue to expand employment opportunities for even 
those with the most severe disabilities.  

Thus, DM programs have not only saved benefit 
dollars and helped employees with disabilities become 
more productive, they have changed American 
business culture.  DM programs have helped to lay 
the foundation within corporate America for the full 
inclusion of people with disabilities.  

Resources

ADA Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline,
(800) 949-4232 (voice/TDD).

Cornell University Disability Management 
Website
http://www.odl.cornell.edu/projects/ilr/ped/1999-07-
21-bruyere/

Certification of Disability Management 
Specialists Commission (CDMSC).
1835 Rohlwing Road, Suite E 
Rolling Meadows, IL  60008
 (847) 394-2106  ·  
info@cdms.org
http://www.cdms.org/

Disability Management Employer Coalition 
(DMEC)
5694 Mission Center Rd., #310
San Diego, CA 92108-4328
 (800) 789-3632 (phone)
 (619) 303-6855 (FAX) 
admin.dir@dmec.org
http://www.dmec.org/

Washington Business Group on Health
50 F Street NW
 Suite 600
Washington, DC 20001
Voice: (202)628-9320 
Fax: (202)628-9244
www.wbgh.com

Watson Wyatt Worldwide
1717 H Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20006
Telephone: (202) 715-7000
FAX: (202) 715-7700
www.watsonwyatt.com/

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
1801 L Street, N.W., Washington, D.C.  20507;
1-800-669-4000 (voice), 1-800-669-6820 (TTY) to 
reach field offices; 1-800-669-EEOC (voice), 1-800-
800-3302(TTY) for publications;  web: 
www.eeoc.gov (publications available online)   

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It has been developed for Cornell University by 
Bruce G. Flynn, Consultant/Watson Wyatt Worldwide. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer

This material was produced by the Program on 
Employment and Disability, School of Industrial and 
Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University, and funded by a grant from the National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research 
(grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for 
accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans 
with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material 
are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect 
the viewpoint of the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's 
interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its ADA 
regulations (29 C.F.R. Part 1630) and its Technical 
Assistance Manual for Title I of the Act.

Cornell University is authorized by the National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research 
(NIDRR) to provide information, materials, and 
technical assistance to individuals and entities that are 
covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR 
is not responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The 
information, materials, and/or technical assistance are 
intended solely as informal guidance, and are neither a 
determination of your legal rights or responsibilities 
under the Act, nor binding on any agency with 
enforcement responsibility under the ADA.



  Friend, D. (2000). HealthCare.com. Bethesda, MD: Watson 
Wyatt Worldwide, p. 71
  Akabas, S., Gates, L., and Galvin, D. (1992). Disability 
Management. New York: AMACOM, p.2.
  Staying @ Work:Increasing Shareholder Value through 
Integrated Disability Management. (1999). Bethesda, MD: 
Watson Wyatt Worldwide, p. 2.
  BNA Workers' Compensation Report. (1996). Bank addresses 
ADA accommodations, comp return to work [? I am not 
sure to what this refers; is "comp" the right word??] in 
same program.  Vol. 7, 1051, p. 37.
  BNA, p.37.
  Investing in Workplace Productivity: Managing Indirect Mental 
Health Costs. (1999). Washington, DC: Washington Business 
Group on Health.
  S. Bruyère (2000). Disability Employment Policies and 
Practices in Private and Federal Sector Organizations.  
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University, School of Industrial and 
Labor Relations Extension Division, Program on Employment 
and Disability.
The Role of Disability Management Programs in ADA Compliance


March, 2001	Cornell University
