The ADA and Total Quality Management

What is the Americans with 
Disabilities Act? 

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) is 
a significant piece of civil rights legislation that extends 
the prohibition against discrimination on the basis of 
race, sex, religion, and national origin to persons with 
disabilities.  The employment provisions in Title I 
prohibit discrimination against persons with disabilities in 
recruitment, pre-employment screening, hiring, 
promotions, layoffs and termination's, and any other 
term, condition, or privilege of employment.  Title I 
covers private employers, state and local governments, 
employment agencies, and labor unions.

What Is Total Quality Management? 

Total quality management (TQM) is a form of doing 
business in which managers and line employees work 
cooperatively toward improved quality and 
productivity.  Three components are necessary for total 
quality management to flourish in any company: 
participatory management, continuous process 
improvement, and use of teams. 

Participatory management is a process of trust and 
feedback that evolves between managers and 
employees.  It means providing individual employees 
and teams with the skills and support they need to 
understand better how they do business, help improve 
the production process, and participate in making 
changes in the organization.  A 1992 Gallup poll 
revealed that 39 percent of American managers had a 
quality improvement program in place and were pleased 
by the results.  

Continuous process improvement means, accepting 
small, incremental gains as steps toward total quality.  
This approach enables employees to develop 
confidence in the total quality management process and 
gives managers opportunities to support and encourage 
employees and teams.  Each process is studied, often 
by the employee responsible for doing it, to see how it 
can be improved.

Cross-functional teams (sometimes called quality 
improvement teams) meet frequently using TQM 
principles to study a particular area that needs work.   

What Is "Reasonable 
Accommodation" under the ADA?

Reasonable accommodation, a critical concept in the 
employment provisions (Title I) of the ADA is a 
modification or adjustment to a job, employment 
practice, or work environment that enables a qualified 
individual with a disability to participate in and enjoy 
equal employment opportunity.  The employer's 
obligation to provide a reasonable accommodation 
applies to all aspects of employment. This requirement 
may arise anytime a person's disability or job changes, 
unless the accommodation causes an undue hardship to 
the employer.  

An undue hardship is an action that poses significant 
difficulty or expense in relation to the size of the 
company, available resources, or the nature of the 
business.  A qualified individual with a disability or 
employee cannot be denied an employment opportunity 
solely because of the need to provide reasonable 
accommodation.  If the employer can show that the 
cost of the accommodation would impose an undue 
hardship, it would still be required to provide the 
accommodation if funding is available from another 
source, e.g. a State vocational rehabilitation agency, or 
if tax deductions or credits are available to offset the 
cost of the accommodation.  In the absence of such 
funding, the individual with the disability requesting the 
accommodation should be given the option of providing 
the accommodation or of paying that portion which 
constitutes the undue hardship on the operation of the 
business.

How Can TQM Be Used to Help 
Implement the ADA?

Total quality management can be used when 
implementing the ADA so as to improve human 
resource practices in general, in addition to increasing 
employment opportunities for people with disabilities. 
The advantages of TQM apply not only to human 
resource departments responsible for recruitment, 
hiring, and employment in both large and small 
companies. 

At least four features of total quality management focus 
on improvements in the workplace that can benefit all 
employees.  
These four features are 
?	capacity building 
?	universal design 
?	focus on strengths rather than deficits
?	use data for decision making  

Emphasis on capacity building calls both for 
changing human resource methods and building the 
changes into day-to-day practice.  Under the ADA, an 
employer may be required to make modifications or 
adjustments to a job application process that enable a 
qualified applicant to be considered for the position 
desired. Improving the capacity of human resource 
processes enhances opportunities for people with 
disabilities and all other potential employees.

Universal design concepts accommodate the 
diversity of the current and future workforce, including 
persons with disabilities.  Whereas universal design is 
frequently discussed in terms of physical accessibility 
and environmental modifications, the same principles 
apply to services and processes.  For example, the use 
of icons on application forms and computer programs 
allows a much broader range of people to recognize 
immediately the information needed.

Focus on strengths rather than deficits create the 
potential for configuring job duties to take advantage of 
individual differences.  Traditional hiring processes often 
emphasize assumed requirements that extend beyond 
the essential functions of a specific job.  As a result, 
they may eliminate potential employees who have 
transferable skills but do not meet all assumed 
requirements.  

Use of data for decision making includes evaluation 
of progress and ways to improve processes.  If a 
company intends to increase the diversity of its 
workforce by hiring employees with disabilities, then 
data about progress in recruiting, interviewing, and 
hiring will provide feedback about the effectiveness of 
its new human resource practices.  

How can the Planning Process of 
Total Quality Management Be 
Applied to Reasonable 
Accommodation?

Most organizations that use total quality management 
use the Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) cycle or a 
variation of it.  Plan-Do-Check-Act can be used as a 
blueprint for supervisors faced with the need to provide 
a reasonable accommodation.  The steps, spelled out 
below, can also help in devising an appropriate 
accommodation for a particular individual.  

Plan.  The individual with a disability and his or her 
supervisor should discuss the needed accommodation, 
evaluate alternative solutions, and select those that 
appear best.  Worker, manager, and other experts 
work as a team.  The President's Committee on 
Employment of People with Disabilities' Job 
Accommodation Network (see below) can help.

Do.  Once the employee and his or her supervisor or 
employer agrees on an accommodation, it can be 
implemented.  This should be done with the 
understanding that the accommodation may need to be 
reexamined and updated in the event of a job change or 
a change in the status of the employee's disability.

Check.  Assess whether the accommodation is 
working.  Ask the individual, observe outcomes of the 
individual's work, and observe the worker.  If there are 
problems, return to the planning portion of the cycle.

Act.  The request for accommodation may signal action 
needed to assess the causes of work-related injury to 
prevent future such occurrences.  Also, the information 
gained overtime on accommodations can be helpful if 
similar such accommodations are needed in the future.  

Educating Personnel about the ADA

Because the ADA applies to all aspects of participation 
in society, including employment, public 
accommodations, transportation, and 
telecommunications, it will affect businesses both as 
employers and as providers of goods and services. 
Each business organization must educate its employees 
on the provisions of the ADA, its relevance to the 
functioning of the organization as a whole, and the 
responsibilities of specific personnel. 

One way to introduce ADA nondiscrimination material 
might be to add it to TQM training efforts, which are being 
offered by many companies.  A familiar term in TQM is 
bench-marking.  Bench-marking is a formalized process 
for assessing current practices in work performance and 
outcomes and comparing that with desired or superior 
performance processes and outcomes.  For example, 
training supervisors on effective bench-marking for unit 
effectiveness could include the number of work-related 
injuries for a particular quarter or the number of persons 
with disabilities who are newly recruited in the workplace.  
Using such examples will raise awareness of disability 
discrimination issues in the context of total quality 
management training for the organization.

Other ADA-related information of particular 
relevance to supervisors includes
?	employment prescreening and applicant interviewing 
?	medical, drug, and other testing
?	identification of essential job functions
?	and equal access for persons with disabilities to 
staff development and promotional opportunities.  



Reference
Jablonski, J.R. (1990).  Implementing Total Quality 
Management competing in the 1990s.  Albuquerque, 
N.M.: Technical Management Consortium.

Resources

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline, 
(800) 949-4232 (voice/TDD).

Job Accommodation Network, 
918 Chestnut Ridge Road, Suite 1, Morgantown, WV 
26506-6080, 
(800) ADA-WORK (voice/TDD).

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 
1801 L Street, NW,
Washington, DC 20507, (800) 669-4000 (voice), 
(800) 800-3302 (TDD), or (800) 666-EEOC 
(publications).

For a more extensive review of the topic see a 
publication entitled "Quality Through Equality: Total 
Quality Management Applied to the 
Implementation of Title I of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act," by Dale Brown, Susanne Bruyère, 
and David Mank, which will be available for purchase 
from your Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center at 800-949-4232 or from LRP 
Publications 
PO Box 980
Horsham, PA 19044-0980
Phone 1-800-341-7874 

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It was written in 1996 by Dale S. Brown, Susanne 
M. Bruyère, and David Mank. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on 
Employment and Disability, School of Industrial and 
Labor Relations-Extension Division, Cornell University, 
and funded by a grant from the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation and Rehabilitation Research 
(grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  
However, opinions about the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of the 
author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the 
publisher.  The Commission's interpretations of the ADA 
are reflected in its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), 
Technical Assistance Manual for Title I of the Act, and 
EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute 
on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to 
provide information, materials, and technical assistance to 
individuals and entities that are covered by the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you 
should be aware that NIDRR is not responsible for 
enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, 
and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of 
your legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor 
binding on any agency with enforcement responsibility 
under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has 
issued enforcement guidance which provides additional 
clarification of various elements of the Title I provisions 
under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance documents are 
available for viewing and downloading from the EEOC 
web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 

The ADA and Total Quality Management


September, 1996	1	CORNELL UNIVERSITY
