Working Effectively with People with Learning Disabilities


What is a Learning Disability?

The National Joint Committee on Learning Disabilities 
describes the term "learning disability" as a general term 
referring to a heterogeneous group of disorders 
manifested by significant difficulties in the acquisition 
and use of listening, spelling, reading, writing, reasoning, 
or mathematical skills. These disorders are intrinsic to 
the individual, presumed to be caused by central 
nervous system dysfunction, and they exist throughout 
the person's life. A learning disability is not a disorder 
that an individual "grows out of."  It is a permanent 
disorder that has a significant effect on learning but is 
not an indicator of intelligence.  An individual with a 
learning disability may develop compensatory skills that 
help them to overcome the disability.

Problems in self-regulatory behaviors, social 
perceptions, and social integration may exist with 
learning disabilities but do not, by themselves, constitute 
learning disabilities. Although learning disabilities may 
occur concomitantly with other disabilities, they are not 
the result of those conditions or influences.

Learning disabilities affect some 10% of the American 
workforce.  As a result, many persons applying for 
work or currently employed by an employer will have 
learning disabilities.  These individuals are often 
intelligent, creative and productive.

Learning disabilities can sometimes cause inconsistent 
work performance and may require reasonable 
accommodation.  Some learning disabilities may have a 
global effect on functioning in the workplace.  Other 
individuals may only need a reasonable accommodation 
for a specific task.

Some common learning disability terminology is listed 
below:

Dyslexia - difficulty with language processing, which, 
in turn, affects reading, writing, and spelling.

Dyspraxia - difficulty with fine motor skills and 
coordination.

Dysgraphia - difficulty with writing, spelling, and 
writing composition.

Auditory Discrimination - difficulty in perceiving 
differences between speech sounds and sequencing 
these sounds into meaningful words, which affects 
reading and spoken language.

Visual Discrimination - difficulty in noticing important 
details and assigning meaning to what is seen, which is 
critical to reading and writing.

What is the Impact of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act on People with Learning 
Disabilities?

The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) prohibits 
discrimination against people with disabilities.  The term 
disability under the ADA is defined as:
1)	a physical or mental impairment that substantially 
limits one or more of the major life activities of such 
individual, 
2)	a record of such an impairment or, 
3)	being regarded as having such an impairment.  

"Substantially limits" means that the person is unable to 
perform, or significantly limited in the ability to perform, 
an activity as compared with an average person in the 
general population.  "Major life activities" refers to 
functions such as caring for oneself, performing manual 
tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, 
learning, and working. 

Learning disabilities are considered physical or mental 
impairments.  The term "Specific Learning Disabilities" 
is cited in the regulations of the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC), which enforces the 
ADA, implementing the employment provisions of the 
ADA (29 C.F.R. Part 1630).  

Whether the ADA would protect a person with a 
learning disability from discrimination depends on 
whether the disability substantially limits a major life 
activity.  For example, an employee whose auditory 
perception difficulties causes her to be unable to gain 
information from a staff meeting likely would have an 
ADA disability, especially where most employees 
would have little or no difficulty gaining relevant 
information from the meeting.  By contrast, the inability 
to take excellent notes of a highly detailed, eight-hour 
technical discussion would not constitute a substantial 
impairment because the average person would also not 
be able to do this.

As the definition of disability makes plain, an employer 
also may not discriminate against an individual with a 
record of a disability or against someone perceived as 
being disabled.  For example, job applicants who have 
been through special education may not be 
discriminated against based on a school record of a 
disability.  Similarly, employers also may not 
discriminate against applicants with learning disabilities 
because of a perception or fear that they cannot read.

An individual's limitations must be caused by a learning 
disability. Thus, an employee who is unable to read or 
write because he or she was never taught these skills, 
and not because of a learning disability, would not be an 
individual with a disability under the ADA.  

Causes of Learning Disabilities.

A learning disability is a developmental disorder that is 
present from birth, although it may go undetected until 
later in life.  While genetic predisposition, perinatal 
injury, and various neurological or other medical 
conditions may be associated with the development of 
learning disabilities, the presence of such conditions 
does not invariably predict an eventual learning 
disability. 

Some individuals with learning disabilities have no 
familial, medical, or environmental history that would 
predict a learning disorder.

Potential Functional Limitations Caused 
by Learning Disabilities.

Workers with learning disabilities may have difficulties 
with:

*  Processing auditory material (e.g. receiving oral 
directions and other communication issues)
*  Writing, including:  issues with spelling, grammar, 
and/or sentence structure; expressing information in 
a written format; and/or legible handwriting.
*  Reasoning ability regarding the comprehension of 
new information, quantitative information, or 
complex verbal information.
*  Reading speed or reading comprehension.

Workplace Accommodations for 
Individuals with Learning Disabilities.

Reasonable accommodations are by definition 
individualized in order to meet the needs of the specific 
applicant or employee.  Some accommodations may 
include:

*  Alternate print formats
*  Reduced-distraction work environments
*  Computer technology for written work
*  Reading materials presented in auditory formats
*  Extended time to learn job tasks or to perform 
work
*  Instructions presented both in written and oral 
formats
*  Allowing the employee to tape-record important 
information
*  Clearly defined job requirements, including the 
dates when projects assignments are due; advance 
notice of any changes
*  Providing handouts and visual aids
*  Using more than one way to demonstrate or explain 
information
*  Breaking information into small steps when teaching 
many new tasks in one lesson (state objectives, 
review previous lesson, summarize periodically)
*  Allowing time for clarification of directions and 
essential information
*  Providing assistance with the proofreading of 
written work
*  Allowing the use of spell check and grammar-
assistive devices

When in doubt about possible accommodations, ask 
the employee what would be helpful.  In addition, 
remember to observe confidentiality.  For example, 
avoid pointing out the employee or the alternative 
arrangements to the rest of the work group.

Resources

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline:
800-949-4232 (voice/TTY)
http://www.adata.org

Learning Disabilities Association of America
4156 Library Road 
Pittsburgh, PA 15234-1349 
(412) 341-1515 (voice) 
(412) 344-0224 (FAX)
http://www.ldanatl.org

International Dyslexia Association
Chester Building 
8600 LaSalle Road, Suite 382 
Baltimore, MD 21286-2044 
Telephone 410/296-0232
http://www.interdys.org

Job Accommodation Network
West Virginia University
P.O. Box 6080
Morgantown, WV 26506-6080
(800) 526-7234 
http://www.jan.wvu.edu/english/homeus.htm



National Center for Law and Learning Disabilities
P.O. Box 368
Cabin John, MD 20818
(301) 469-8308

National Center for Learning Disabilities
381 Park Avenue South, Suite 1401 
New York NY 10016 
Telephone: 212/545-7510
http://www.LD.org


Office of Disability Employment Policy -- 
U.S Department of Labor
1331 F Street, N.W., Suite. 300
Washington D.C. 20004
202-376-6200 (voice)
202-376-6205 (TTY)
202-376-6219 (FAX)
http://www.dol.gov/dol/odep/

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Helpline: 800-669-4000 (voice); 800-800-3302 
(TTY); or 800-669-EEOC (publications-voice).
http://www.eeoc.gov

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It was written in July 2001 by Eve Woodman 
Tominey and Matthew Tominey, Cornell University. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability and the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment 
and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-
Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant 
from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for 
accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of 
the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  
The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in 
its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification 
of various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  
Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing 
and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  
http://www.eeoc.gov 

Other brochures on the ADA produced by 
the Program on Employment and 
Disability
Are available on-line at  
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada
Working Effectively with People with Learning Disabilities and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder


July 2001		CORNELL UNIVERSITY
