Occupational Safety and Health
and Disability Nondiscrimination in the Workplace: 
Complying with Dual Requirements  


Why should HR professionals be informed about the 
intersection of disability nondiscrimination laws and health 
and safety requirements in the workplace? 

Human resource professionals often have responsibilities 
for implementing the requirements of state and federal 
legislation, including disability nondiscrimination and health 
and safety laws.  Sometimes the interaction of different 
legal requirements can be confusing.  In a random sample 
survey of the membership of the Society for Human 
Resource Management (SHRM) conducted in 1998 by 
Cornell University,  respondents indicated that they were 
frequently or occasionally uncertain of selected areas 
where the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) 
and the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSH 
Act) intersect.  For example, approximately one-half of the 
respondents expressed uncertainty about whether OSHA 
regulations supersede the confidentiality requirements of 
the ADA.  Other areas of uncertainty included whether 
worksite modifications or ergonomic changes constitute 
reasonable accommodation (46% of respondents), and 
whether it is permissible to discipline an employee who is a 
risk to self or others (40%).  

The following discussion will provide an overview of the 
employment sections of the ADA, the requirements of the 
OSH Act, a discussion of key areas where these laws 
intersect, and resources for future reference.  Staying 
current on agency guidance and emerging case law in 
these areas will further assist the HR professional in 
helping businesses resolve questions involving workplace 
safety and the rights of employees with disabilities.

What does Title I of the ADA require? 

Title I of the ADA protects qualified individuals with 
disabilities from employment discrimination on the basis of 
disability.  Title I is enforced by the U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).   These 
protections apply to the entire employment relationship, 
including the application process, hiring, training, 
promotion, termination, compensation, and other benefits 
and privileges of employment, such as health and 
retirement benefits, and employer-sponsored social 
functions.  Providing necessary reasonable 
accommodations is considered to be part of the ADA's 
nondiscrimination requirements.   

The ADA requires employers to provide necessary 
reasonable accommodations for qualified individuals with 
disabilities.  Potential reasonable accommodations include 
making existing facilities accessible, job-restructuring, 
part-time or modified work schedules, assistive 
technology, providing aides or qualified interpreters, 
modifying tests or policies, and reassignment to a vacant 
position.  Generally, the individual with a disability must 
inform the employer that an accommodation is needed.  

The employer should confer with the employee about what 
sorts of accommodations would enable him/her to perform 
the essential functions of the position.  When no 
accommodation is readily identified or alternative options 
are desired, technical assistance may be helpful in 
determining how to accommodate an employee in a 
specific situation.  If the individual cannot perform an 
essential function of the job, even with accommodation, 
the individual is not considered "a qualified individual with a 
disability" under the law (and you may have to consider 
reassignment as a reasonable accommodation).  In 
addition, the ADA does not require employers to provide 
accommodations that would pose an "undue hardship" on 
the operation of the business.  

What does the Occupational Safety and Health Act 
require? 

The Occupational Safety and Health Administration's 
(OSHA) mission is to prevent work-related injuries, 
illnesses and deaths.  Since the agency was created in 
1971, occupational deaths have been cut in half and injuries 
have declined by 40 percent.  Congress created OSHA 
under the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act), 
signed into law on December 29, 1970 .  

The OSH Act is based on the premise that every worker 
has a right to a workplace that is free from recognized 
hazards.  When a potential hazard is identified, the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), 
which is part of the U.S.  Department of Labor, develops a 
standard against which workplace practices or conditions 
should be measured.  Unlike some other employment 
regulations, OSHA requirements are applied universally to 
all employers, regardless of the volume of business they 
conduct or the number of people in their employ.

After the implementation of a standard, the Labor 
Department can determine which workplaces will be 
inspected, either by the request of an employee in the 
particular workplace, or at OSHA's discretion.  
Inspections are conducted with the permission of the 
employer, and according to OSHA guidelines.  Violations 
of a standard are punishable by government-ordered 
abatement and monetary fines, set according to the size of 
the business, the seriousness of the violation, the good 
faith of the employer, and the record of prior violations.  
Violations that result in the death of an employee are 
punishable under criminal law. 

Some of the requirements of the OSH Act overlap with 
provisions of the ADA.  The HR professional is likely to 
encounter questions about the intersection of these laws in 
the areas of employee testing and screening, confidentiality 
of medical records, and reasonable accommodation.   

How do the ADA and OSH Act requirements intersect in 
the area of employment testing and screening?

Some employers have used pre-employment physical 
fitness tests and other exams to screen out applicants 
prone to ergonomic hazard injuries.  The ADA places 
limitations on employee testing.  If an individual with a 
disability or a class of individuals with disabilities is 
screened out by a test or other qualification standard, the 
employer must show that the test or standard is job-related 
and consistent with business necessity and that the 
standard cannot be met with a reasonable accommodation. 
 In most instances, a risk of future injury won't satisfy this 
ADA standard.  The ADA also prohibits an employer from 
making medical inquiries or requiring physicals before a job 
offer is made, and places certain restrictions on post-offer, 
pre-employment inquiries and exams.  After the person is 
hired and becomes an employee, any medical inquiries and 
examinations must be job-related and consistent with 
business necessity.  All of these restrictions on medical 
exams and inquiries are designed to prevent potential 
discrimination based on disability.  

The OSH Act, in contrast, affirmatively requires employers 
to monitor and test employees in a variety of situations to 
assure safety.  For example, employees exposed to high 
noise levels are required to be included within an 
audiometric testing program, which includes among other 
things, annual hearing tests .  The ADA's limits on 
employee and applicant testing might initially appear to 
conflict with OSHA's need for testing in furtherance of 
workplace safety goals.  However, the ADA regulations 
recognize that if the employer's alleged discriminatory 
action was taken in order to comply with another federal 
law or regulation, the employer may assert this as a 
defense to the charge of discrimination.  The employer's 
defense may be rebutted by a showing of pretext, or by 
showing that the federal standard did not require the 
discriminatory action or could have been complied with in 
a non-exclusionary way .  A survey of the case law does 
not reveal any significant cases illustrating a conflict 
between the ADA's limits on medical inquiries and testing 
and OSHA's testing requirements, which leads this author 
to surmise that the differing goals and requirements of the 
ADA and the OSH Act are being harmoniously construed 
in a common sense way.  Knowledgeable HR professionals 
can assist in resolving these conflicts early on, determining 
whether the requirements of both laws can be met or 
whether the ADA's conflicting federal law defense is 
applicable.   

What are the considerations in complying with the ADA's 
confidentiality requirements regarding medical records and 
the OSH Act's recordkeeping requirements relating to 
occupational illness and injury? 

The ADA requires strict confidentiality of medical records. 
 All information obtained from post-offer medical exams 
and inquiries must be collected and maintained on separate 
forms, in separate medical files and must be treated as a 
confidential medical record.  Employers should take steps 
to guarantee the security of the employee's medical infor-
mation, including keeping the information in a medical file 
in a separate locked cabinet, apart from the location of per-
sonal files, and should designate a specific person or 
persons to have access to the medical file.  Employers may 
disclose the records, if necessary, to supervisors and 
managers in regard to work restrictions or necessary 
accommodations, to first aid and safety personnel, and to 
government officials investigating ADA and other disability 
discrimination laws.  In addition, relevant information can 
be disclosed to state workers' compensation offices and to 
insurance companies that require a medical exam to 
provide employees with health or life insurance.

The OSH Act requires employers to keep records of 
workplace injuries and illnesses, and grants OSHA 
personnel access to such records in the interest of 
exposing potential hazards and their causes .  About 1.3 
million employers with 11 or more employees - 20 percent 
of the establishments OSHA covers - must keep records 
of work-related injuries and illnesses.  Workplaces in low-
hazard industries such as retail, service, finance, insurance 
and real estate are exempt from record keeping 
requirements.  

OSHA has recently issued a new ruling on recordkeeping 
to improve the system that employers use to track and 
record workplace injuries and illnesses .  OSHA Forms 300 
and 301 both note that they contain information about 
employee health and that this information must be used in a 
manner that protects the confidentiality of employees to the 
extent possible while the information is being used for 
occupational safety and health purposes.   

OSHA compliance personnel may also conduct an 
examination of employee medical records solely to verify 
employer compliance with the medical surveillance 
recordkeeping requirements of an occupational safety and 
health standard.  However, the OSHA regulations note that 
an examination of this nature shall be conducted on-site 
and, that OSHA compliance personnel shall not record and 
take off-site any information from medical records other 
than documentation of the fact of compliance or non-
compliance.

In addition, OSHA takes the position that access to 
employee medical records will in certain circumstances be 
important to the agency's performance of its statutory 
functions.  Due to the substantial personal privacy interests 
involved, OSHA authority to gain access to personally 
identifiable employee medical information will be exercised 
only after the agency has made a careful determination of 
its need for this information, and only with appropriate 
safeguards to protect individual privacy .  

Overall, the OSHA regulations appear to be concerned 
about the confidentiality of employee medical information 
in a manner that is generally consistent with the ADA's 
confidentiality requirements.  H.R.  personnel should guide 
employers to construe OSHA requirements in a manner 
that also complies with the ADA's confidentiality 
provisions whenever possible.  Clearly, however, OSHA 
personnel and other individuals designated in the OSHA 
regulations, including representatives from the National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), will 
insist upon access to those medical records they deem vital 
to their mission .  While these parties are not listed in the 
ADA as having access to confidential medical records, the 
ADA's conflicting federal law and regulation defense 
would protect an employer who grants access to OSHA 
representatives acting pursuant to federal law.  

How does the ADA's reasonable accommodation 
requirement interact with the OSH Act?

The ADA does not override federal health and safety 
requirements.  If OSHA requires a standard, an employer 
must comply with it.  However, an employer cannot just 
screen out a person with a disability as a result of health 
and safety testing.  The ADA requires that the employer 
consider the possibility of reasonable accommodation to 
enable the employee to perform his or her current job in 
accordance with OSH Act requirements.  For example, if 
an audiometric test required by OSHA identifies that an 
employee has a hearing loss because of exposure to loud 
equipment, the employer might want to terminate the 
employee, seeing this as a potential risk, or perhaps 
transfer the person to another job.  The ADA would 
require that the employer first consider an accommodation, 
such as sound abatement equipment, to enable the 
individual to continue in his/her current job, and as a last 
resort, reassignment to another position.  

Sometimes the OSHA regulations will not permit a 
particular type of accommodation.  For instance, OSHA's 
respirator requirements are clear and specific.  The 
employer would not have to keep an employee in a position 
that requires a respirator if the worker is not able to wear a 
respirator.  However, the ADA would still require that the 
employer consider transferring this employee to an 
equivalent, vacant position.  

What is "direct threat" under the ADA and how does it 
relate to the OSH Act?

Some employers are concerned that a worker with a 
disability could be a safety hazard, either to him or herself 
or to co-workers or customers.  The ADA takes this 
concern into account, but only if it is founded upon clear, 
documented evidence that the individual is a "direct threat" 
to himself or others because of the nature of the job and 
the specific characteristics of that individual's disability.

In determining whether an individual with a disability poses 
a direct threat, including an individual with a contagious 
disease, the factors to be considered include: (1) the 
duration of the risk; (2) the nature and severity of the 
potential harm; (3) the likelihood that the potential harm 
will occur; and (4) the imminence of the potential harm.  
Even if the person is found to pose a significant risk of 
substantial harm, part of the reasonable accommodation 
determination is an analysis of whether the individual can 
be accommodated in a way that eliminates the direct threat 
or reduces it to an acceptable level.

The direct threat standard is a tough standard for an 
employer to meet.  Employers are not required to do a 
direct threat analysis, however, if an OSHA standard 
mandates the removal of an employee from a particular job 
for health and safety reasons.  Again, the employer must 
always consider whether there is an effective 
accommodation that will allow the employee to come into 
compliance with OSHA rules, and if not, must consider 
reassigning the worker to an equivalent, vacant position. 

What other experts can help the HR professional dealing 
with OSHA and ADA requirements?

Larger employers may employ their own specialists to 
assist with health and safety considerations and 
accommodation issues, including health and safety 
specialists, ergonomists, occupational health specialists, 
physical therapists, and occupational therapists.  Smaller 
employers may hire these services as needed from outside 
agencies.  Knowing which professionals to call is often the 
first important step for HR professionals, who will often be 
assisting supervisors in dealing with these issues.  The HR 
professional will work closely with these service providers 
in applying and utilizing their advice within the framework 
of ADA and OSHA requirements.  

For example, orthopedic or musculoskeletal injury, 
specifically back injury, is the type of disability that has the 
highest number of claims before the EEOC for alleged 
disability discrimination under the ADA (approximately 
16% of total claims to date) .  H.R. professionals will 
often encounter accommodation and health and safety 
questions about persons with musculoskeletal injuries .  
Supervisors or HR professionals may want to seek the 
assistance of an ergonomist, physical or occupational 
therapist, industrial hygienist, or health and safety 
specialist.  Ergonomists integrate knowledge derived from 
the human sciences to match jobs, systems, products, and 
environments to the physical and mental abilities and 
limitations of people .  

An ergonomist uses information about people, for example 
their size (height, etc.),  ability to handle information and 
make decisions,  ability to see and hear, and  ability to 
work in extreme temperatures, to match people to jobs .  
Physical therapists, or PTs, are health care professionals 
who evaluate and treat people with health problems 
resulting from injury or disease.  PTs assess joint motion, 
muscle strength and endurance, function of heart and 
lungs, and performance of activities required in daily 
living .  

Occupational therapists (OTs) evaluate and treat individuals 
with injuries, illnesses, cognitive impairments, psychosocial 
dysfunctions, mental illness, developmental learning 
disabilities, physical disabilities, or other disorders or 
conditions.  Evaluation and intervention by an OT focuses 
on an individual's level of function and involves 
assessment of performance components, and performance 
context .  

An industrial hygienist plays a role in insuring that the 
workplace is as free as possible from hazards and that the 
workers in the community at large are protected from 
potential health threats.  Some of the areas that industrial 
hygienists may get involved in include: testing for and 
possibly removing toxic materials in the work environment; 
helping to limit disabilities caused by repetitive 
and/prolonged movement, such as typing at a keyboard, or 
sitting at a desk all day; and setting limits on exposure 
levels and providing guidelines for control of chemicals, 
noise, and radiation in the workplace.  

Further information about the services provided and the 
credentials required for an industrial hygienist, as well as 
safety engineers, may be gained from the relevant 
professional associations. ,  ,  

The HR professional is also likely to get many questions 
about mental health disabilities.  Employers often express 
concern that people with certain psychiatric disabilities or a 
history of treatment may pose a safety concern.  
According to the National Mental Health Association, 
"Violent acts committed by persons with mental illness 
represent a small fraction of the violence perpetrated in our 
country, yet these acts are frequently highly sensationalized 
by the media and lead to the continued stigmatization of 
persons with mental illness."  Getting more information 
about mental health or psychiatric disabilities in general, 
and consultation on the unique accommodation 
considerations for a particular individual, is imperative 
when there are questions surrounding a mental health 
disability .  A mental health professional or employee 
assistance program (EAP) professional may be of 
assistance in this situation. 



Moving Forward

HR professionals can play a pivotal role in helping 
employers to understand and effectively navigate the dual 
requirements of the ADA and OSH Act.  By working 
closely with frontline supervisors and technical experts 
who deal with health, safety and accommodation issues, 
HR professionals can assist their organizations in fully 
complying with OSHA's health and safety requirements, 
without needlessly screening out or discriminating against 
applicants or employees with disabilities.  

Resources

ADA Technical Assistance Program and Disability and IT 
Technical Assistance Centers
(800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), www.adata.org

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(800) 669-4000 (Voice), (800) 669-6820 (TTY), 
www.eeoc.gov

Cornell University Tips for HR Professionals -
Tools to help HR professionals build inclusive workplaces.
(607) 255-7727 (voice); 607-255-2891 (TDD)
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/hr_tips

Occupational Safety and Health Administration
For Workplace Safety and Health Questions:
(800) 321-OSHA (6742)
U.S.  Department of Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, 
N.W., Washington, D.C.  20210
www.osha.gov

Job Accommodation Network
(800) ADA-WORK (voice/TTY), 
www.dol.gov/dol/odep/public/pubs/ek98/jan.htm 

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It was written in June, 2002  by Susanne M. 
Bruyere, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, Program on 
Employment and Disability, Cornell University

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment 
and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-
Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant 
from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for 
accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of 
the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  
The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in 
its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, 
materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal 
rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any 
agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification 
of various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  
Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing 
and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  
http://www.eeoc.gov 

 A copy of the full report of this study is available from the 
Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) at the 
SHRMStore at 800-444-5006 (item code 62.17023).  The cost is 
$39.95 for SHRM members and $49.95 for nonmembers.  An 
Executive Summary of this report is available from the Cornell 
University web site at http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/daa/.
 For more information, please consult the U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity website at www.eeoc.gov.
  For more information, see the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration website at www.osha.gov.
  29 U.S.C.  Section 666(e).
  See 29 C.F.R. Section 1910.95. 
  29 C.F.R. Section 1630.15(e)
  29 C.F.R. Section 1904.
  For further information, see http://www.osha-
slc.gov/recordkeeping/OSHArecordkeepingforms.xls 
  29 C.F.R. Section 1913.
  29 C.F.R. Section 1904.40.
  See U.S. EEOC web site at URL 
http://www.eeoc.gov/stats/ada-receipts.html.
  See Workplace Accommodations for Persons with 
Musculoskeletal Injuries, produced by Cornell University, 
available at 
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/extension/files/download/Musculos
keletal_Disorders.pdf. 
  For further information, contact the Human Factors in 
Ergonomics Society, PO Box 1369, Santa Monica, CA. 90406-
1369, Telephone 310/394-1811, Fax 310/394-2410, and Email 
HRES@compuserve.com.
  Congress and the President took action in 2000 to rescind 
the major ergonomics rule that DOL had published at the end 
of 1999. OSHA is currently developing voluntary guidelines to 
assist employers in recognizing and controlling hazards. 
  The American Physical Therapy Association, 1111 N. Fairfax 
St., Alexandria, VA. 22314, Telephone 703/684-APTA, Fax 
703/684-7343, Internet http://www.apta.org.
  American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc., 4720 
Montgomery Lane, Bethesda, MD. 20814-3425, Telephone 
301/652-2682, Fax 301/652-7711, Internet http://www.aota.org.
  American Industrial Hygiene Association, 2700 Prosperity 
Avenue, Suite 250, Fairfax, VA.  22031, Telephone 703/849-
8888, Fax 703/207-3561.
  American Society of Safety Engineers, 1800 East Oakton 
Ave., Des Plaines, IL 60018-2187, Telephone 703/692-4121.
  National Safety Council, 444 North Michigan Ave., Chicago, 
IL 60611, Telephone 800/621-7619.
  Position Statement adopted by the Board of Directors of the 
National Mental Health Association on June 13, 1999 regarding 
"Constitutional Rights and Mental Illness."
  See Employing and Accommodating Workers with 
Psychiatric Disabilities, produced by Cornell University, 
available at 
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/extension/files/download/Psychiatric
_Disabilities.pdf.
  Further information about employee assistance program 
professionals can be found at www.eap-association.com.


Occupational Safety and Health and Disability Nondiscrimination in the Workplace
Cornell University		June 2002
