The ADA and Personnel Training

What is the Americans with Disabilities Act? 
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is a landmark 
piece of civil rights legislation that extends the prohibition 
against discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, 
religion, national origin, and age to persons with disabilities. 
 Because the ADA covers all aspects of participation in 
society, such as employment, public accommodations, 
transportation, and telecommunications, its impact is felt in 
business organizations in multiple ways.  Businesses are 
covered by the ADA both as employers and as providers of 
goods and services. It is therefore important that each 
business organization equip its employees for compliance 
with the ADA by providing appropriate information and 
personnel training on the ADA's requirements, its relevance 
to the functioning of the organization as a whole, and the 
responsibilities of specific personnel. 

Which Personnel in our Organization Should Receive 
ADA Training?
The impact of the ADA is broad.  Everyone in your 
organization would find information and training on the 
ADA relevant to their jobs. General information could be 
useful to all employees, informing them of their rights and 
obligations under the ADA. 

In the fall of 1998, the Society for Human Resource 
Management (SHRM) partnered with Cornell University to 
conduct a survey of SHRM members.   The purpose of this 
survey was to assess the ADA's impact on HR practice 
since implementation, and one of the items studied was 
training conducted on the ADA.  The survey asked 
respondents if their organizations' employees had been 
trained in a number of ADA-related topics, including: non-
discriminatory recruitment and hiring, the accommodation 
process, equal access in promotional opportunities and 
training, accommodation for mental health problems, 
defining essential job functions, confidentiality requirements 
of medical information, limitations and exclusions the ADA 
and other federal laws allow health plans to impose, non-
discrimination in the disciplinary process or termination, 
conflict resolution in the accommodation process, disability 
awareness or sensitivity training, and interaction with other 
state and federal legislation.  In nearly all of the areas, more 
than half of the respondents (813 SHRM members were 
interviewed) indicated their employees received training. 

Employers should consider the best way to train their 
personnel so that they may benefit from ADA training both 
to ensure that their actions are in compliance with the ADA, 
and that they are properly responsive to persons with 
disabilities.  Although all employees should receive some 
training, there are categories of personnel that should be 
considered for specialized training.  These include: training 
or staff development personnel; human resource 
development professionals; top management; middle 
managers; front line supervisors; line employees; union 
leadership and field representatives; benefits and 
compensation staff; safety and environmental health 
personnel; recruitment and job interviewing personnel; 
industrial/organizational psychologists or other personnel 
doing pre-employment screening; organizational 
development personnel; ergonomic specialists; short and 
long-term disability managers; technology personnel; 
customer relations representatives; and receptionists and 
others who interact with the public.

Which Kinds of ADA Information Should Be Shared 
With These Personnel? 
All of your employees would benefit from some basic 
knowledge about the existence of the ADA and its 
requirements.  More specific information should be directly 
relevant to the functioning of personnel in the job categories 
listed above, whose responsibilities might be impacted by 
the requirements of a particular provision of the ADA.  The 
following are some examples of personnel training that can 
be considered and targeted to meet the unique information 
needs of personnel, dependent upon their job functioning: 

*  Overall knowledge of all titles of the ADA 
*  Knowledge specific to the ADA employment provisions
*  Knowledge specific to the ADA public accommodations 
provisions
*  Employment pre-screening and applicant interviewing 
under the ADA 
*  Medical, drug, and other testing under the ADA 
*  Relationship between the ADA and other state and 
federal employment and non-discrimination legislation
*  Identifying essential job functions
*  Writing job descriptions that identify essential job 
functions 
*  The reasonable accommodation process
*  General information regarding specific disabilities and 
possible accommodations
*  Job evaluation and compensation information and 
persons with disabilities
*  Career equity/promotional considerations for persons 
with disabilities
*  Re-skilling when disability occurs
*  Non-discriminatory performance appraisals 
*  Impact of the ADA on accommodation requirements in 
personnel training
*  Accessibility of information technology in the 
workplace
*  Data/record keeping on accommodations
*  Negotiation/conflict management in the reasonable 
accommodation process
*  The place of job coaching and/or supportive 
employment in the reasonable accommodation process 
*  Customer relations with customers with disabilities 

In training, selected topics, such as specific 
accommodations for persons with particular disabilities, 
may be best presented by coupling the information of an 
instructor familiar with the ADA with that of a professional 
with expertise on accommodation for such persons.  Some 
examples of these professionals include ergonomists, 
physical or occupational therapists, rehabilitation 
counselors, supported employment specialists, mental health 
or drug and alcohol abuse therapist/counselors, or 
rehabilitation engineers.

Other topics that may not directly relate to the requirements 
of the ADA, but may support the intent of the ADA are 
training in such topics as: attitudes toward persons with a 
disability; disability as a facet of diversity; effective 
disability management; prevention of disability through 
workplace safety; and effective recruitment of persons with 
disabilities.
 
The above list is not exhaustive, but representative of many 
content areas that can be considered for effective 
information sharing and staff development on the provisions 
of the ADA.  Specific content should be targeted toward the 
job responsibilities of personnel receiving the training.  The 
nature of the work itself and the kinds of work-related 
illnesses and disabilities that occur more often for a 
particular employer, may determine the focus provided on 
accommodations for particular types of disabling 
conditions.

Where is a Good Place to Start a Training Effort on the 
ADA?
As previously mentioned, personnel at all levels of an 
organization would benefit from ADA information and 
training.  Respondents to the SHRM/Cornell survey 
indicated that top management commitment to training and 
nondiscrimination is the number one way to effectively 
reduce barriers in the employment and advancement of 
people with disabilities.  It is important that any 
dissemination initiative on disability nondiscrimination and 
diversity be seen as a company-wide commitment for a real 
impact to occur. 

In larger companies, where human resource professionals 
are chiefly responsible for employee recruitment, 
interviewing, pre-employment screening, benefits, 
compensation, and training, the human resources 
department may be the appropriate place to focus initial 
information dissemination and training efforts.  It would 
also be useful to include employee and labor relations 
personnel in this round of training.

Manager training should come next in larger companies 
(and perhaps would be first in smaller companies).  Some 
of the topics on the ADA employment provisions, which 
can be targeted to the information needs of supervisors, are 
as follows: pre-employment screening and ADA 
requirements; medical, drug, and other testing; writing job 
descriptions with essential job functions; the reasonable 
accommodation process; performance expectations and the 
person with a disability; and equal access for persons with 
disabilities to staff development and promotional 
opportunities.

What are Factors to Consider for Accessibility of 
Training to Persons with Disabilities?
The employment provisions of the ADA provide that no 
employer shall discriminate against a qualified individual 
with a disability in regard to job training.  This means that 
personnel trainers, to meet the accommodation needs of a 
trainee with a disability, would be required to provide a 
reasonable accommodation absent undue hardship.  
Examples of possible modifications include:  

*  Restructuring or simplifying training formats to 
accommodate trainees with cognitive impairments
*  Making training rooms wheelchair accessible
*  Brailling or audio taping print materials 
*  Providing a sign language interpreter or reader
*  Captioning videotape materials 
*  Being aware of environmental irritants for chemically 
sensitive trainees
*  Advocating on behalf of a trainee for training held 
elsewhere, when an accommodation is needed for that 
individual

Trainers also might consider use of information 
technologies and other distance learning approaches, which 
are increasingly being used for personnel training.  This can 
be a real asset for enhanced easy and cost effective access 
to training, allowing the user to access the classroom from 
his/her own office or home.  However, the transformation 
of the Internet from a text-based medium to a robust multi-
media environment has created a growing digital divide in 
access for people with disabilities.  Previously, people with 
visual impairments were able to read web pages with the 
help of audible screen readers.  Today, graphical web pages 
are a barrier if they do not incorporate accessible web 
design.  The barrier created by inaccessible web pages is 
not limited to people with visual and mobility disabilities, but 
applies also to persons with learning or cognitive disabilities. 
 Similarly, persons with hearing impairments cannot access 
audio or video streaming contents unless they are captioned. 
 

Designing accessible on-line training can be beneficial to 
more than just employees with disabilities; many other 
employees will also find it more user-friendly.   Some "do's 
and don'ts" regarding IT access for people with disabilities 
include: 
*  recognition that not all PDF formats are translatable by 
screen readers  (for persons with visual impairments) 
and therefore a text only alternative should also be 
included if a non-accessible version of PDF is used; 
*  alt-tags and labels should be used to denote 
graphics/pictures; 
*  use of frames is strongly discouraged; 
*  avoid the use of Flash and javascript.

Are There Other Related Training Responsibilities to 
Consider?
Under the ADA, covered entities cannot use a third-party to 
discriminate on their behalf.  Thus, employers may have to 
consider the possible ADA information needs of 
organizations with which they have contractual 
relationships, such as insurance companies, third party 
administrators of worker compensation or health care 
benefits, labor unions, or employee assistance programs.

ADA Title I prohibits discriminating against a qualified 
individual with a disability in all terms, conditions, and 
privileges of employment, including health benefits.  The 
ADA specifically prohibits a covered entity from 
participating in a discriminatory contractual or other 
arrangement with organizations that provide fringe benefits 
to employees.

Where employees are represented by a union, the union 
steward is the person in the union with whom each member 
may have direct contact; that is, to whom s/he brings 
his/her problems and grievances, from whom s/he gets 
information, and who s/he generally sees everyday on the 
job.  Management and the union should provide the shop 
steward with training so that s/he can serve a role in 
information dissemination on the ADA.  Information about 
the ADA should be shared with union membership on such 
topics as the union's role in informing the workforce about 
non-discrimination of persons with disabilities in the 
workplace and the reasonable accommodation process.

There are a number of topics related to the ADA 
employment provisions that may have relevance to the 
functioning of Employee Assistance Program (EAP) 
professionals.  The initial focus of EAP professionals as the 
profession was evolving early on was on service to persons 
who have alcohol and drug addiction problems; certainly 
these individuals may be persons who are covered by the 
employment provisions of the ADA.  Therefore, providing 
EAP professionals with information about who is covered 
and the rights of people with disabilities under the ADA is 
most important.  

In addition, EAP professionals might be able to assist with 
accommodation inquiries in select situations.  SHRM 
members indicated in the survey that they would like more 
information on accommodations for persons with mental 
health problems.  This may be an area in which EAP 
personnel can be of assistance.  In addition, persons with 
other kinds of disabilities may also seek support from EAP 
professionals to assist them through the difficult times they 
incur when a disabling condition or serious illness affects 
them either in the workplace or in life generally.  EAP 
professionals may be the counseling and support system 
that an organization uses, and therefore providing EAP 
professionals with information about the impact of 
disability, and the rights of persons with disabilities is most 
appropriate. EAPs often also are aware of local community 
resources and can refer employers and supervisors to 
relevant resources who can help in addressing an 
accommodation request. 

Where Can I Get Further Resources to Conduct 
Training on the Americans with Disabilities Act? 
Many private commercial distributors and not-for-profit 
organizations have now developed informational and training 
materials on the ADA.  A comprehensive listing of print and 
audio visual materials on the employment provisions of the 
ADA are available from your local Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center; call 1-800-949-4232 to 
request such a list.  A set of informational brochures on 
accommodations for particular disabilities is available from 
the Cornell University web site at 
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped, or call (607) 255- 7727, or 
also from your disability and business technical assistance 
center as listed above.

Further Resources
ADA Disability and Business Technical Assistance 
Center Hotline
800/949-4232 (voice/TTY). 

Job Accommodation Network (JAN)
800/526-7234, West Virginia University, P.O. Box 6080, 
Morgan-town, West Virginia 26506-6080.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
1801 L Street, NW, Washington, DC  20507, (800) 669-
4000 (Voice) to reach EEOC field offices; for publications 
call (800) 800-3302 or (800) 669-EEOC (voice/TTY).

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University. 
 It has been updated by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., Program 
on Employment and Disability from the original, which she 
wrote in 1996.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials Development 
Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of the ADA 
(Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development 
of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on 
Employment and Disability and the Pacific Disability and 
Business Technical Assistance Center.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disability 
and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also 
conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National Institute 
on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at:
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment and 
Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension 
Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant from the National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and Rehabilitation Research 
(grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material 
are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of 
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  
The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its 
ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance Manual 
for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.
Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals and 
entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, 
and/or technical assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, 
and are neither a determination of your legal rights or responsibilities 
under the Act, nor binding on any agency with enforcement 
responsibility under the ADA.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification of various 
elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  Copies of the 
guidance documents are available for viewing and downloading from 
the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 
 Cornell University received funding for this research from the US 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) as a Research and Demonstration 
Project (Grant No. H133A70005); and it worked with the Society for 
Human Resource Management (SHRM), the Washington Business 
Group on Health (WBGH), and the Lewin Group. 

 Copies of the full SHRM report are available from the SHRM Store at 
1-800-444-5006. An Executive Summary is available on-line from Cornell 
University at http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/.
 Use "Bobby" (http://www.cast.org/bobby); "WAVE" (http://www. 
Temple.edu/inst_disabilities/piat/wave/); or "LIFT" (http://www, 
usablenet.com) on line web site analysis tools to examine your pages.
 For an example of how a screen reader works, to go web site: 
http://www.afb.org/info_document_view.asp?documentID=1284.

The ADA and Personnel Training
October, 2001		CORNELL UNIVERSITY
