Working Effectively with Persons Who Are Hard of Hearing, Late-Deafened, 
or Deaf

Who is Considered Hard of Hearing or Deaf?

Hearing loss ranks with arthritis, high blood pressure, and 
heart disease as one of the most common health 
conditions.  While it is true that the prevalence of hearing 
loss increases with age, with one out of three individuals 
over the age of 65 having difficulty hearing, the majority of 
people with hearing loss (60%) are working-age adults 
(i.e., 21 to 65 years of age).  Between 26 and 28 million 
Americans have difficulty hearing, or almost 10% of the 
US population.  

There are several systems for classifying people who have 
difficulty hearing.  One method is the audiological 
classification, which classifies an individual based on 
his/her degree of hearing loss (i.e., minimal, mild, 
moderate, moderate to severe, severe, and profound).  
While this classification system provides an objective 
account of the severity of a person's hearing loss, it does 
not provide information about the day-to-day functioning 
of the person. 

Another system is based on a functional classification.  In 
this classification system, people who have hearing loss fall 
into three main subgroups: (1) those who are hard of 
hearing; (2) those who are deaf and became so in 
adulthood; (3) and those who are born deaf or became 
deaf early in life.  Although these three groups all share 
impaired or absent hearing, they are very different in many 
ways and have a variety of different characteristics, needs, 
desires, and ways of communicating. 

A major problem with the functional classification system 
is that there is frequently an overlap between categories, 
with many individuals not fitting neatly into any one 
category.  For example, there are individuals who were 
born profoundly deaf or acquired a profound hearing loss 
early in childhood but communicate using oral means 
rather than American Sign Language.  In addition, an 
increasing number of individuals today have cochlear 
implants.  When the implant device is turned off, they may 
be profoundly deaf; however, when the unit is turned on, 
they function as hard of hearing.

Hearing Loss and Understanding Speech

It is important to realize that understanding speech is the 
key issue, and that this is different from hearing other 
sounds.  Many persons who can hear certain sounds, such 
as a door slamming or a car horn, are nevertheless unable 
to hear and understand speech, which is quieter and 
involves more complex patterns of sounds.  Persons with 
hearing loss are often aware that someone is speaking, 
without necessarily being able to understand all of what is 
being said.  

Moreover, the use of hearing aids does not "fix" a hearing 
loss in the same way that glasses "fix" a vision problem for 
most people.  Hearing aids can often help to some degree, 
but they do not restore normal hearing in the way that 
glasses usually restore normal 20/20 vision.   This is 
because hearing loss is not just about loudness, but also 
about the clarity or understandability of what comes 
through, even with hearing aids or other devices.  The 
experience of listening with a hearing loss has sometimes 
been compared to listening to a very fuzzy, "static-y" 
radio, or to listening to a cell phone conversation in an area 
of poor reception, where the speech sounds "break up" or 
fade in and out randomly and unpredictably.  Of course, 
for some people, those who are born deaf or become deaf 
as adults, the radio has effectively been turned off or 
turned to a pure static channel.

Hearing Loss and the ADA 

Title I of the ADA protects qualified individuals with 
disabilities from employment discrimination.  Under the 
ADA, an individual with a disability is a person who has:

** A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
one or more major life activities;
** a record of  such an impairment; or 
** is regarded as having such an impairment.

"Substantially limits" means that the person is unable to 
perform, or is significantly limited in the ability to perform, 
an activity compared to an average person in the general 
population.  Major life activities include functions such as 
caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, 
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working. 
 Mitigating measures such as medication, medical 
equipment and coping mechanisms are considered in 
determining whether an impairment rises to the level of a 
disability.  Hearing loss is a physical impairment that may 
substantially limit the major life activity of hearing, 
depending on the degree of severity and the effectiveness 
of mitigating measures.  A minimal hearing loss or a more 
severe hearing loss that is largely corrected through the use 
of hearing aids probably would not rise to the level of an 
ADA disability.  Whether an individual's hearing loss rises 
to the level of a disability under the ADA is always decided 
by examining the each individual's specific impairment.

In order to be protected under the ADA, the applicant or 
employee with a disability must also be qualified for the 
position held or desired.  The ADA defines a qualified 
individual with a disability as a person with a disability who 
satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education, and other 
job-related requirements of the employment position and 
who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can 
perform the essential functions of the job.  

Providing a necessary reasonable accommodation for an 
individual with a disability is considered a form of non-
discrimination under the ADA.  Reasonable 
accommodation is a modification or adjustment to a job, 
the work environment, or the way things usually are done 
that enables a qualified individual with a disability to enjoy 
an equal employment opportunity. 

Reasonable accommodations for individuals with 
disabilities should be implemented, as necessary, in all 
phases of employment, including the selection process, 
training and orientation, performance of job tasks, 
meetings with co-workers and supervisors, career 
advancement and planning, business social events, and 
eventual resignation and retirement.  An employer is not 
required to provide a reasonable accommodation that 
would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the 
business.  The concept of undue hardship includes any 
action that is unduly costly or disruptive. 

Working with Persons Who Are Hard of Hearing

Persons who are hard of hearing represent roughly 26 
million people, or about 93% of all people who have some 
hearing loss.  The term "hard of hearing" refers to a 
hearing loss from 25 decibels (abbreviated "dB"), which is 
a mild loss, to about 90 dB (a severe loss).  Although a 
hearing loss in the hard-of-hearing range can begin at any 
age, the majority of such losses begin in adulthood, often 
in a person's 30's and 40's.  The percentage of people 
with hearing loss increases with age.  Many such hearing 
losses are progressive, meaning that they may begin as a 
loss in the mild-to-moderate range, and become more 
severe as the years go by.  Occasionally, a person's 
hearing ability drops suddenly, but more often the 
progression is slow and gradual, occurring over a period of 
years.  Frequently, the person with a progressive hearing 
loss will not be aware initially of his or /her own hearing 
loss until it reaches a level at which communication 
difficulties become apparent.  Often, it is family and 
friends who first begin to notice that something is not quite 
"right" based on the person's inappropriate responses - or 
failure to respond - in communication situations.  It is 
partly for this reason that people with hearing loss wait an 
average of seven years before seeking help. 

An individual with a hearing loss in the hard-of-hearing 
range usually communicates using a combination of 
strategies that rely on the person's remaining degree of 
hearing ability, perhaps enhanced by a hearing aid or an 
"assistive listening device" (discussed below), and supple-
mented by speech-reading (lip-reading) or other visual 
means as the loss moves more towards the severe end of 
the spectrum.

Hearing ability varies according to the situation:  
Something that is hard for most people to understand and 
appreciate is that, for persons who are hard of hearing, the 
ability to hear is very dependent on the specifics of the 
situation.  A person who is hard of hearing may be able to 
communicate and understand very well in a one-to-one 
meeting in a quiet, well-lighted but glare-free room, and 
when rested and calm.  The same person may have great 
difficulty understanding during a group meeting, when 
several people are talking, where there is background noise 
(e.g., air-conditioning or ventilation systems that are noisy), 
where there is glare or poor lighting, and/or when s/he is 
fatigued or stressed.  Thus, an important factor in working 
with people who are hard of hearing is to determine how 
favorable the specific situation is for that individual, and 
what changes might improve the situation.  For example, 
participants in a group meeting might be asked to speak only 
one at a time and to be sure the hard of hearing person 
knows who is speaking. Seating might be rearranged so the 
hard of hearing person is nearer to the speaker(s), and does 
not have to look at speakers who are back-lighted against a 
window or other source of glare.  Inevitably, the person 
who is hard of hearing sometimes will miss something and 
will ask for a clarification.  If a simple repetition does not 
work the first time, it is important to re-phrase the comment 
rather than to frustrate all involved with multiple verbatim 
repetitions that still don't help.  If all else fails, a quick 
written note may save the day.  It is particularly 
disrespectful and often offensive to say, "Oh, it wasn't 
important," or "It doesn't really matter."  The person who 
is hard of hearing wants and is entitled to be included in the 
conversation as much as anyone else.  These are simple 
accommodations that can make a large difference in 
understanding for the person who is hard of hearing.  In 
fact, many of these accommodations are potentially 
beneficial to all employees, not just those who are hard of 
hearing.

Speech-reading (lip-reading):  On the one hand, speech-
reading (often also called lip-reading) can be a valuable tool 
to assist a person who is hard of hearing or deaf to 
understand more of what is being said.  On the other hand, 
there is a lot of "mythology" about this subject, which often 
implies that speech-reading can be an avenue to full 
understanding of a conversation, and that all persons with 
hearing loss are somehow automatically able to speech-read. 
 Speech-reading is a skill that can be learned, but like all 
skills, there is great variability from person to person in how 
well they can learn or use that skill.  One fundamental fact 
is that many speech sounds are made in the mouth or throat 
and are not at all visible externally (for example, "uh" or 
"k").  Another fundamental fact is that different sounds that 
are visible look the same on the lips (for example, "b" 
versus "p").  As a result, even a perfect speech-reader can 
actually "see" only about half of what is said.  A person 
with excellent speech-reading skills can sometimes "fill in 
some of the blanks" by knowing the context of the situation 
or conversation, or because of general knowledge of the 
world (for example, in "the dog was ****ing loudly," 
chances are the missing word is "bark").  In general, while 
speech-reading can be a useful in some conversations, it 
cannot be relied on to carry the full weight of a 
conversation, either for the person with hearing loss or for 
that person's conversational partner(s). 

Assistive listening devices:  Certain accommodations involve 
various kinds of "assistive listening devices."  A common 
example is an amplified telephone handset for a worker who 
is hard of hearing, but still able to use the telephone.  
Another example is a hearing-aid-compatible phone.  Many 
hearing aids have what is known as a "telecoil" or "t-
switch" that improves the ability to hear on the telephone - 
but only if the phone is designed to be compatible with 
hearing aids.  Federal regulations have made almost all wire-
line phones hearing aid compatible, but the situation is less 
consistent with cordless and cellular phones.  

Individuals whose hearing loss is more severe, and who 
have difficulty using the telephone even with a "t-switch" or 
an amplified handset, may elect to use a text telephone 
(frequently referred to as a TTY or TDD).  Such devices 
include a keyboard, like a computer or typewriter, and allow 
communication over the telephone lines with anyone else 
who also has a text telephone.  To allow communication 
between persons who use a text telephone and those who 
do not have such a device, every state has a telephone relay 
system.  Such systems provide an intermediate operator 
who transfers printed text to speech and vice versa in order 
to make a telephone conversation possible.  Further 
information about these and similar systems, their 
availability, and (usually modest) cost can be obtained from 
the resources listed later in this brochure.

Other assistive listening devices, such as magnetic induction 
loops, FM systems, and infrared systems are designed to 
improve the ability to hear in group or audience situations.  
Some individuals who are hard of hearing may wish to use 
personal portable amplification devices, perhaps with a 
directional microphone.  These are especially helpful when 
there is background noise or many speakers, such as in a 
restaurant or company lunchroom.

Working with Persons Who Became Deaf as Adults 
("Late-Deafened"):  

The term "deaf" generally refers to a hearing loss greater 
than 90 dB (profound hearing loss).  Persons are generally 
considered "deaf" if they are unable to hear and understand 
speech (even with a hearing aid), and so must rely on vision 
for communication.  Persons who become deaf in 
adulthood are often called "late-deafened" to distinguish 
them from persons who were born deaf or who became 
deaf early in life.  Deafness beginning in adulthood is a low 
prevalence condition, believed to affect approximately 1.5 
million persons in the US.  Because of their dependence on 
the visual mode for communication, their situation is very 
different from that of persons who are hard of hearing. 

Because they grew up as hearing persons and learned 
spoken English (or another native language) as children, 
persons who are late-deafened generally have easy-to-
understand speech. They are also generally comfortable 
communicating via print, whether by writing notes, on a 
computer, or by captioning (more on this below).  Some 
late-deafened persons also use a form of sign language that 
is closely based on English.  

Although some late-deafened persons continue to use 
hearing aids to assist with environmental sounds or 
awareness that someone is speaking, by definition they are 
not generally able to hear and understand speech even with 
such assistance.  Most late-deafened persons will therefore 
use a text telephone or TTY, will depend on speech-reading 
or lip-reading (though this is generally a very limited and 
unsatisfactory means of communication on its own), and 
will need some form of print or visual communication to 
interact with others.  Because of their reliance on vision for 
communication, the points made above about proper 
lighting, avoidance of glare, and good sight lines become 
even more critical.  For group or audience situations, there 
is an important service known as CART (Computer 
Assisted Real-Time Transcription).  A CART-trained court 
reporter uses a stenotype machine (like that used to record 
proceedings in the law courts) connected to a laptop 
computer and a projector.  As each speaker speaks, the 
CART operator keyboards what is being said, the computer 
translates the keystrokes into printed words, and the 
projector projects the resulting text onto a screen that can 
be seen by the late-deafened person.  With a skilled    
operator, this system provides essentially real-time access to 
a spoken conversation for the person who is late-deafened.

Working with Persons Who Became Deaf Early in Life:

If a person is born deaf, or becomes deaf very early in life 
before learning to speak fluently (before about age three), 
the impact of the deafness on language and speech is much 
more profound than if the loss occurs later in life.  Children 
learn to speak a native language by hearing others speak it, 
and by hearing their own voice as they learn to produce the 
words and phrases of that language during the first years of 
life.  If deafness intervenes at this early stage, the individual 
never learns what the language sounds like, as spoken by 
others or by themselves.  As a result, despite average or 
above average intelligence, the individual may never fully 
master the language the way a native speaker does, either in 
spoken communication or in reading and writing the 
language.  This set of facts determines the communication 
needs and preferences of persons with early onset deafness. 
 Written notes and company memos are often expressed in 
a level of English that is easy and natural for native English 
speakers, but that can be very difficult for persons who are 
born deaf (and for other non-native speakers of the 
language).  

In the United States, persons who are born deaf or lose their 
hearing at an early age generally prefer to communicate 
using American Sign Language (ASL).  Those persons who 
use ASL and become members of the community of 
persons who are deaf are now commonly referred to as 
"Deaf" (with a capital "D").  There are also some 
individuals who have been born deaf, but who do not know 
sign language, and who communicate using oral means 
(speaking and speech-reading).  When communicating at 
work with an individual who is Deaf and relies on ASL to 
communicate, it is often appropriate to employ the 
assistance of a professional sign language interpreter.  Other 
appropriate measures include providing note-takers (one 
cannot use vision to watch a speaker or sign language 
interpreter and simultaneously use vision to write notes), 
providing basic sign language classes for hearing co-
workers and supervisors, and ensuring that written 
company documents are understood by the Deaf person 
whose command of English may not be equivalent to that of 
a native speaker.

On-the-job needs for anyone who is hard of hearing, 
late deafened, or Deaf:

On the job, the key issue is to determine the communication 
needs and preferences of the person who is hard of hearing, 
late-deafened, or Deaf, and then to provide the necessary 
communication assistance.  As discussed above, 
communication assistance may involve technological 
devices and/or communication supportive services such as 
interpreters or CART operators.  Whether communication 
assistance is provided as a reasonable accommodation 
required under the ADA or whether an employer voluntarily 
provides an accommodation in order to help an employee 
with a minimal degree of hearing loss perform at his/her full 
potential, the employer is engaging in good business 
practices.  Human resources policies that maximize every 
person's potential and keep valued employees in the 
workforce contribute to a company's success.

What Type of Jobs Are Held By Persons Who Are Hard 
of Hearing, Late-Deafened, or Deaf?

Persons who are hard of hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf can 
perform the majority of jobs available.  However, factors 
that create communication barriers can limit their 
participation or success in the workplace.  These factors 
include physical and environmental barriers such as 
noise, light and glare levels within a room, and distance 
from the speaker.  Attitudinal barriers can also limit the 
job participation or success of persons who are hard of 
hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf.  Such barriers include 
stereotyping, ignorance, and a focus on disabilities 
(limitations) rather than abilities (strengths). 

With few exceptions, persons who are hard of hearing, late-
deafened, or Deaf, when given appropriate training and 
accommodations, have the same range of job options as any 
other person.  There are indeed no jobs that are just for 
persons who are hard of hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf.  
They are employed in as diverse a range of jobs as are 
people who hear.  In recent years, several have been 
successful in high profile jobs that require excellent 
communication skills, including screen actors (Marlee 
Matlin) and President of the United States (Ronald Reagan 
and Bill Clinton).  Given their capabilities and the provision 
of appropriate communication accommodations, persons 
with hearing losses can be productive employees in most 
any job.  Persons who are hard of hearing, late-deafened, or 
Deaf have been successful as architects, artists, computer 
programmers, managers, entrepreneurs, physicians, 
psychologists, lawyers, teachers, telecommunications 
technicians, and judges, as well as many other positions.

Success on the job depends largely on the skills and 
attitudes of the worker, as well as on the willingness and 
ability of the employer to identify and resolve 
communication barriers encountered in the workplace.  
Appropriate accommodations can be implemented in all 
phases of employment, from participation in the selection 
process to training and advancement.  Once an employer 
learns that an applicant or an employee is hard of hearing, 
late-deafened, or Deaf and in need of an accommodation, 
the employer needs to be aware of its potential obligations 
under the Americans with Disabilities Act, as well as the 
benefits of keeping all of its employees performing 
productively.

Accommodating the Person Who is Hard of Hearing, 
Late-Deafened, or Deaf During the Employee Selection 
Process

During the selection process, employers must determine if 
the hard of hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf person is capable 
of performing the essential functions of the job.  It is critical 
to obtain an accurate picture of the applicant and his/her 
background, skills, and abilities to do the job.  Typically, 
this process involves two steps:  screening written job 
applications and interviewing prospective applicants.

Some applicants who are Deaf may have difficulty in 
reading and comprehending written applications, especially 
those that are heavily loaded with complicated English 
phrases or unfamiliar terms (note that this is not likely to be 
a problem with persons who are hard of hearing or late-
deafened).  Appropriate accommodations in this case may 
include such strategies as allowing the person to take an 
application and obtain their own assistance in filling it out, 
allowing more time for completion, or providing a sign 
language interpreter.  When an applicant notifies you about 
their hearing loss, the simplest strategy is to ask the 
applicant what appropriate accommodations are needed.

Accommodations may also be required during selection 
interviews.  At a minimum, interviewers should be sensitive 
to the range of communication abilities of persons who are 
hard of hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf.  Simple 
accommodations may include conducting the interview in a 
quiet, well-lit environment with minimal visual or auditory 
distractions.  The interviewer must be willing to use the 
interviewee's assistive listening device (such as a portable 
microphone), if one is used.  Talk at a normal pace and at a 
normal volume.  If asked, be willing to converse at a 
different pace or volume, or to try other strategies like note-
writing.  If asked to repeat a question or comment, do so.  
If the interviewee asks for a second repetition, it is usually 
not helpful to repeat the exact same words or phrases yet 
again; instead, rephrase the question or comment in other 
words.  Avoid sitting in front of bright lights, windows, or 
other sources of glare, which make it difficult to see the 
face and thus to speech-read.

If requested, use an effective professional sign language 
interpreter or CART operator.  When using either of these 
services, speak directly to the applicant, not to the 
interpreter or CART operator.  The role of the interpreter or 
CART operator is to facilitate communication, not to explain 
or to participate in the interview.  All information shared in 
the interview is confidential, and will not be disclosed by the 
interpreter or CART operator to other parties.  Referrals for 
professional sign language interpreters or CART operators 
may be obtained from public or private agencies such as the 
local office of the state Vocational Rehabilitation 
department, the state commission for persons who are deaf 
or hard of hearing (if there is one), or by consulting the 
telephone directory (under "Translators and Interpreters," 
"Transcribing Services," or "Reporters - Court").  

If group interviews are conducted, it is very important that 
only one person speaks at a time.  Be sure the person who 
is hard of hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf knows who is 
about to speak before that individual begins speaking.  The 
goal in a job selection interview is to obtain an accurate 
picture of the person's skills, experiences, and capabilities 
to do the job.  The interviewer should be alert for 
communication difficulties and take steps to address any 
that might arise so that important information about the 
applicant is not obscured or completely missed.

Enhancing Productivity on the Job

Research has also documented that employers frequently 
rate persons who are hard of hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf 
as better or about the same as hearing co-workers in task 
performance (e.g., quality/quantity of output, attendance, 
safety, working without supervision).  Workers give 
themselves similar ratings.  However, both groups 
prioritized the following factors as critical to job retention 
and advancement:

** Access to periodic training to upgrade skills
** Access to staff meetings and small group meetings
** Reassignment of job duties if necessary to accommodate 
the hearing loss
** Use of interpreters or CART operators
** Availability of amplified telephone handsets/headsets 
and/or text telephones (TTY or TDD) and other 
assistive listening devices (ALDs)
** Rearranging rooms to insure good visual communication 
and to minimize conflicting noise

On-the-Job Accommodations to Enhance 
Communication

Enhancing the performance of the employee who is hard of 
hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf does not necessarily have to 
be expensive or require a great deal of equipment.  In many 
instances, communication accommodations may be useful 
to all employees, not just those who have a hearing loss.  
The first step is to identify the communication situations in 
which the employee with a hearing loss is experiencing 
difficulty.  The responsibility to improve the situation and 
minimize communication barriers in these situations is 
equally shared by all persons in the workplace, that is, those 
who are hearing, hard of hearing, late-deafened, and/or 
Deaf.  The following are examples of accommodations that 
can facilitate communication in a variety of situations.

Face to Face Situations 
** Ensure that the office and/or work environment is 
adequately lighted and without glare that could impede 
communication
** Consider moving the worker to a quieter environment if 
environmental noise interferes with communication
** Arrange the office or work station in such a way that the 
worker can readily see when someone is entering their 
office or workplace (i.e., no reliance on hearing someone 
coming up from behind)
** Use assistive listening devices when needed
** Use interpreters (oral and/or sign language) and CART 
operators when needed
** Be aware of, and modify, your personal habits that may 
serve as barriers to comfortable speech-reading.  
Examples include placing your hands in front of your 
mouth, chewing while talking, not facing the employee, 
or wearing a mustache or beard that obscures the lips
** Encourage co-workers and supervisors to become aware 
of and comfortable with equipment such as text 
telephones and assistive listening devices, and to learn 
sign language through employer-sponsored training 
classes

Interactive Distance Communication Situations
** Ensure the avail-ability of text telephones (also known 
as TTYs or TDDs), telephone and other amplifying 
devices, or other appropriate assistive listening devices 
(ALDs) to help facilitate communication among 
employees and/or with customers
** Use your state's Telecommunication Relay Services, 
where an inter-mediate operator receives verbal 
information and types it to the person using a text 
telephone, or vice versa.  The "800" toll-free phone 
numbers for these services are listed in local phone 
directories.
** Consider e-mail and FAX as an alternative for intra- 
and inter-office communication, and communication 
with customers
** Provide visual or tactile pagers for communication, 
instructions, and as an alerting system
** Share company in-formation via computer networks
** Use computers (especially laptops) for note-taking
** Provide visual as well as auditory alerting devices on 
telephones and fire alarm systems


Group Situations
** Ensure that all rooms used for meetings or training 
sessions are adequately lighted and without glare
** Utilize assistive listening devices such as FM 
transmitters/ receivers, infra-red systems, magnetic 
induction loop systems (for users of hearing aids that 
have telecoils or "T-switches"), and/or closed-
captioning decoders on TVs used in meeting and 
training situations
** Use real-time captioning (CART ser-vices) for 
meetings and training events
** Ensure that video training materials (videotapes, 
DVDs, CDs, etc) are captioned
** Use professional sign language and/or oral interpreters 
when needed
** Use note-takers for meetings and group sessions
** Consider using "communication cops" at meetings 
(one per-son who monitors the meeting to ensure that 
only one person speaks at a time)
** Provide mentors and coaches

Performance Evaluations
Performance evaluations are typically based upon a written 
review coupled with a face-to-face interview.  If reading 
ability necessitates extra time, provide workers with 
written information in advance.  Because barrier-free 
communication is critical, use multiple strategies as 
necessary to ensure success.  As described elsewhere in 
this document, multiple strategies might include the use of 
assistive listening devices, computers for note-taking, and 
professional sign language or oral interpreters.

Resources

Prior to contacting any of the following resources, it is 
important to remember that the person with the most 
information and experience regarding needed workplace 
accommodations may be the job applicant or worker.  Ask the 
individual to tell you what accommodation(s) work best for 
that person in face-to-face, interactive distance, and group 
communication situations.  If additional information or 
assistance is needed, consult the following resources.

Regional/State Resources
ADA Regional Disability Business Technical Assistance 
Center
Hotline:  800.949.4232 (Voice/TTY)

State Vocational Rehabilitation Department, Independent 
Living Department, and/or State Commission for the Deaf and 
Hard of Hearing, listed in local phone books or available from 
telephone Directory Assistance

University Resources:

The ADA Project
101 Corporate Lake Drive
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO  65203
573.882.3600 (Voice/TTY)
www.adaupdate.org

Gallaudet University
National Information Center on Deafness
800 Florida Ave., NE
Washington, DC  20002-3695
202.651.5000 (Voice/TTY)
www.gallaudet.edu

Job Accommodations Network
West Virginia University
P.O. Box 6080
Morgantown, WV  26506-6080
800.526.7234 (Voice/TTY)
www.janweb.icidi.wvu.edu

National Technical Institute for the Deaf
National Center on Employment of the Deaf
1 Lomb Memorial Drive
Rochester, NY  14623
716.475.6205 (Voice/TTY)
www.ntidweb.rit.edu

Rehabilitation Research and Training Center 
For Persons who are Hard of Hearing or Late Deafened
Alliant International University Foundation
6160 Cornerstone Court East
San Diego, CA  92121-3725
800.623.7619 (Voice/TTY)
858.642.0266 (FAX)
www.hearinghealth.org

University of Arkansas Rehabilitation Research and Training 
Center
  For Persons who are Deaf or Hard of Hearing
4601 West Markham Street
Little Rock, AR  72205
501.686.9691 (Voice/TTY)
501.686.9698 (FAX)
www.uark.edu/depts/rehabres

Consumer Organizations:

Association of Late-Deafened Adults (ALDA, Inc)
1131 Lake Street  #204
Oak Park  IL  60301
877-348-7537 (voice/FAX)
708-358-0135 (TTY)
www.alda.org

League for the Hard of Hearing
71 West 23rd Street
New York, NY  10010
917.305.7804 (Voice
917.305.7999 (TTY)
917.305.7888 (FAX)
www.lhh.org

Say What? Club, Inc
An On-line Organization of Persons with Hearing Loss
www.saywhatclub.com

Self Help for Hard of Hearing People, Inc.
7910 Woodmont Ave., Suite 1200
Bethesda, MD  20814
301.657.2248 (Voice)
301.657.2249 (TTY)
301.913.9413 (FAX)
www.shhh.org

National Association of the Deaf
814 Thayer Ave.
Silver Spring, MD  20910-4500
301.587.1788 (Voice)
301.587.1789 (TTY)
301.587.1791 (FAX)
www.nad.org

Professional Organizations:

American Deafness and Rehabilitation Association (ADARA)
P.O. Box 727
Lusby, MD  20657
410.495.8440 (Voice/TTY)
410-495-8442 (FAX)
E-mail:  ADARAorgn@aol.com

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
19801 Rockville Pike
Rockville, MD  20852
800.638.8255 (Voice)
301.897.5700 (TTY)
www.asha.org

National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication 
Disorders
National Institute of Health
31 Center Drive, MSC 2320
Bethesda, MD  20892-2320
800.241.1044 (Voice)
800.241.1055 (TTY)
www.nidcd.nih.gov



Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, Inc.
333 Commerce Street
Alexandria, VA  22314
703.838.0030 (Voice)
703.838.0459 (TTY)
703.838.0454 (FAX)
www.rid.org

Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology 
  Society of North America
1700 N. Moore Street
Arlington, VA  22209-1903
703.524.6686 (Voice)
703.534.6639 (TTY)
703.524.6630 (FAX)
www.resna.org

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It has been updated in 2001 by Carren J. Stika, 
Ph.D., Director of Research, and Raymond J. Trybus, Ph.D., 
Center Director, RRTC for Persons who are Hard of Hearing 
or Late Deafened, 6160 Cornerstone Court East, San Diego, 
CA  92121-3725.  The previous version was developed in 
1994 by the University of Arkansas Research and Training 
Center for Persons who are Deaf of Hard of Hearing.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990s by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html



Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment and 
Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension 
Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant from the National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and Rehabilitation Research 
(grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material 
are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint 
of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher. 
 The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its 
ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance Manual 
for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals and 
entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, 
and/or technical assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, 
and are neither a determination of your legal rights or responsibilities 
under the Act, nor binding on any agency with enforcement 
responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification of 
various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  Copies of 
the guidance documents are available for viewing and downloading 
from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 


Working Effectively with Persons Who are Hard of Hearing, Late-Deafened, or Deaf


September, 2001	Cornell University
