Mediation and Title I of the ADA

What is Mediation?

Mediation is a unique form of Alternative Dispute 
Resolution (ADR).  Mediation is a process in which a 
neutral third party assists two or more disputants in 
finding a mutually acceptable solution to their conflict.  
The mediator facilitates discussions, enhances 
communications, and uses a variety of other skills and 
techniques to help the parties reach a settlement, but 
has no power to make a decision.  The process is 
voluntary and confidential. 

While many people think of using mediation only after a 
formal complaint or lawsuit has been filed, mediation 
techniques can also be appropriately and effectively 
applied at the first hint of a problem or dispute that may 
not yet even rise to the level of a legal claim.   This 
article will explore the techniques and process of 
mediation, as well as discuss some special 
considerations involving the mediation of cases that 
arise under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
 Title I of the ADA prohibits discrimination in 
employment against a qualified individual with a 
disability.

What Are the Other Kinds of ADR? 

In addition to mediation, other forms of ADR include 
arbitration, mini-trials, early neutral evaluation, private 
judging, and screening panels.  With the exception of 
mediation, all of these forms of ADR are similar to the 
litigation model.  That is, they all use a system of 
advocates (lawyers) who represent their respective 
clients' cases to a third-party decision-maker similar to 
a judge.  Arbitration is often a binding decision-making 
process in which the arbitrator hears evidence and 
renders a decision.  In neutral expert evaluation, the 
attorneys present their cases to a third attorney who has 
many years of experience.  This expert renders an 
informal opinion emphasizing the strengths and 
weaknesses of their cases, with the purpose of giving 
the parties a more realistic basis for out-of-court 
settlement.  Private judging is identical to standard 
litigation but uses former judges to hear cases in private 
courtrooms.  Screening panels are used like neutral 
experts to evaluate cases at an early stage and 
encourage settlement or dismissal of cases unlikely to 
be successful.  ADR, including mediation, is encouraged 
by many courts.  In some jurisdictions, attorneys are 
ethically required to inform their clients about ADR 
options.

Why is Mediation Becoming So Popular? 

Mediation is the fastest growing form of ADR.  
Mediation is being used more and more in the 
employment context, including ADA Title I cases.  It is 
also being used to resolve Title II (transportation) and 
Title III disputes (public accommodation). 

Mediation has become a popular form of ADR because 
the mediation process is voluntary, confidential, 
expeditious, and far less costly than litigation.  The 
process also leaves the parties in control of the 
outcome.  Furthermore, participating in mediation does 
not require a waiver of statutory or due process rights, 
and an agreement to mediate leaves the parties free to 
pursue other courses of action at any time they wish.  
Mediation also allows people to be heard and permits 
the parties to be as creative as they wish in formulating 
an agreement that will work for them.

In addition, many organizations are using mediation or 
mediation techniques in-house to resolve employment 
disputes at the earliest possible point.  Through 
mediation, problems often are resolved before they 
impact on office peace and productive functioning of 
employees.  It also helps to avoid litigation and its 
associated costs.

How Does Mediation Differ from Litigation?

Mediation sharply contrasts with the adversarial 
processes of litigation or arbitration and, at least 
theoretically, decreases the hostility that can result from 
both.  Mediation neither judges guilt nor innocence, nor 
decides who is right or wrong.  Rather, its goal is to 
give the parties the opportunity to:
(1)	vent and defuse feelings, 
(2)	clear up misunderstandings, 
(3)	determine underlying interests or concerns, 
(4)	find areas of agreement and ultimately, 
(5)	incorporate these areas into solutions devised 
by the parties themselves.

Litigation usually asks the question: "Who is most at 
fault and how much should s/he lose?"  Mediation asks 
much different types of questions, such as: "We're 
getting a divorce, how shall we continue to parent our 
children?"  Or, "The car that was sold was defective, 
what will we do about this transportation problem?"  
Or, "What needs to be done to improve our working 
relationship or correct the work environment (e.g., 
when impaired by discriminatory comments or 
actions)?"

By focusing on both parties' interests, rather than just 
their stated positions, mediation can often lead to 
win/win solutions, where both parties are satisfied with 
the settlement that they have personally helped to craft. 

What Does the Mediator Do?

A mediator, unlike a judge, a hearing examiner, or an 
arbitrator, has no legal power to render a judgment or 
award.  The mediator is also not an advocate for one 
side.  Nor is the mediator acting as a therapist or 
counselor, although the mediation process can be 
therapeutic.  Rather, a mediator is a neutral third party 
who helps the parties talk out their problems by 
facilitating discussions and enhancing communications.  
Both parties must have trust in the mediator's neutrality; 
a mediator's effectiveness depends on the parties' trust.

The best mediators have good common sense, the 
power of persuasion, and skills to facilitate problem 
solving.  A facilitative mediator remains totally neutral 
and rarely makes recommendations that reveal how 
s/he feels about a dispute.  Instead, the mediator tries to 
reconcile opposing points of view by searching for 
common ground.  While mediator styles vary 
tremendously, in any mediation, a mediator will 
typically:

* Explain the process and develop an atmosphere 
conducive to problem-solving negotiations.

* Give each party a chance to tell its side of the story, 
to vent emotions, and to feel like it has been heard 
by both the mediator and the other side.

* Gather all the information available about issues and 
the interests of both parties by listening and asking 
questions in both joint and separate sessions, 

* Help identify issues and find common ground. 

* Encourage the parties to brainstorm and create 
options.

* Help the parties evaluate and narrow the options, 
including helping the parties make rational decisions 
between reaching an agreement and pursuing a 
claim.

* Assist, if requested, in drafting a memorandum of 
understanding with the major points of agreement 
(final agreements typically would be handled by 
counsel in complex cases; in simple cases, such as 
small claims court disputes, the mediator may draft 
the final agreement).

How Can My Business Use Mediation to Prevent 
Litigation?

Some organizations actually employ in-house mediators 
or conflict resolution specialists to whom employees can 
turn for help in resolving disputes.  More commonly, 
human resources (H.R.) professionals have been trained 
to use mediation techniques in the every day course of 
dealing with conflicts between employees or between 
supervisors and employees.  Many of the mediation 
techniques discussed in the preceding section are used 
by in-house conflict resolution specialists and H.R. 
professionals (sometimes one and the same) as they 
assist employees and/or supervisors in trying to resolve 
disputes. 

Mediation techniques may be used in an informal, non-
structured way that is simply termed a discussion or 
series of discussions.  Alternatively, the parties may be 
invited to sit down and mediate their dispute with an in-
house person serving as the mediator. When no in-
house person with mediation skills is available, the 
employer sometimes will contract with an outside 
mediator to sit down and work with the parties to 
resolve their disputes.

Issues appropriate for mediation may range from an 
interpersonal dispute that is not legally cognizable (two 
employees who just don't get along and are disturbing 
office peace), to a clear cut legal claim that has not yet 
been filed.  In general, it is advisable to discuss and 
mediate problems as soon as possible before they 
intensify or escalate to the point of litigation.

In cases where there has been a legal violation, a 
written mediation agreement with relief would typically 
be drafted and signed (see discussion below).  In other 
cases, the most important part of the mediation is to air 
the issues.  Sometimes an apology and an oral 
commitment to do things differently are all that is 
needed.  Sometimes the parties may want a written 
commitment.

What Can Be Agreed to in a Mediated Settle-
ment? 

Creative resolution is a hallmark of mediation.  In a 
mediated agreement involving a legal claim, the parties 
can agree to a solution that is available in court as well 
as to those that go beyond what a judge could order.

In an employment discrimination case, the following 
remedies typically are obtained by going to court 
(depending on the issues in the case): 

* Back pay, front pay
* Attorney's fees
* Compensatory and punitive damages
* Injunctive relief, including reinstatement, promotion, 
transfer, etc.
* Posting notices

In addition the following solutions are not common to 
litigation but are available through mediation:

* Structured payments, annuities
* Confidentiality
* Outplacement services
* Training program at workplace
* Apology
* Revision of employment records
* Publicity releases
* Employment references
* Health care and benefits continuation
* Stock options
* Donations to charity
* No reapplication provision/rehire agreement in the 
event of breach of settlement

What is Different About ADA Mediations?

All of the basic principles and advantages of mediation 
apply equally to ADA mediations.  There are also a 
number of additional considerations with ADA 
mediations, however, starting with ensuring that an 
individual with a disability is provided with any 
accommodation necessary for him/her to participate in 
the mediation.  Some of the special considerations that 
may come into play during ADA mediations will be 
discussed below.  

Early Mediation When Agreement Cannot Be 
Reached On Accommodation Issues

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC), which enforces ADA Title I, strongly 
encourages the parties to engage in an "interactive 
process" when determining whether and what 
reasonable accommodation is required to enable an 
applicant or employee to perform the essential functions 
of a job held or desired.  This interactive process often 
results in the parties agreeing on an effective 
accommodation, perhaps with the help of an outside 
expert.  When the parties cannot reach agreement, 
mediation may be a beneficial next step.  An in-house 
conflict resolution specialist or H.R. person with 
mediation skills may be able to help facilitate 
discussions, either informally or by conducting a full 
mediation with the applicant or employee and the 
employer representative responsible for the accommo-
dation decision.  At times, it may be necessary to turn 
to an outside mediator if the in-house person is not 
considered to be sufficiently neutral. 

What Are the New ADA Mediation Guidelines?

Recently, a National Work Group, comprised of 12 
mediation practitioners, trainers, and administrators, 
developed ADA Mediation Guidelines.  These guide-
lines set forth valuable information and guidance on the 
mediation of cases arising under the ADA, as well as 
under other disability civil rights statutes, such as the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Fair Housing Act 
Amendments of 1988, and comparable state and local 
civil rights laws. The guidelines can also be applied to 
the mediation of non-ADA cases, such as commercial 
or family disputes, that involve a party with a disability. 

How Do I Choose A Mediator for an ADA Case?

You want to choose a mediator who is competent to 
mediate the type of workplace problem at issue.  The 
Guidelines take the position that the mediator not only 
should be knowledgeable about the mediation process 
but also about the subject matter of the dispute.  In 
general, mediators should have knowledge of 
disabilities, disability access, and disability law, including 
general ADA case law developments and guidance 
documents issued by the regulatory agencies.  A 
mediator knowledgeable about the status of the law will 
be able to work with the parties effectively in exploring 
the range of settlement options and will know if the 
parties are making informed decisions and enforceable 
agreements.  A mediator may be competent to mediate 
ADA cases as a result of ADA mediation training, 
experience doing ADA mediations, legal knowledge of 
the ADA, or some combination of all of these factors.
Keep in mind that Title I (employment) issues are 
different than ADA Title III issues (public accommo-
dations), and a particular mediator may be competent 
to mediate a case arising under one but not both of 
these titles.  

Making Mediations Accessible 

The Guidelines make clear that mediation providers 
have an obligation to make their services accessible to 
persons with disabilities.  If the employer is running an 
internal mediation program, the employer must also 
ensure that the mediation is accessible.  

ADA mediation providers should make all aspects of 
mediation, ranging from training sessions to mediation 
sessions, accessible to persons with disabilities, 
including parties and other mediation participants, staff 
volunteers, and mediators.  For these purposes, the 
broadest definition of disability should be applied, 
including chronic conditions, episodic symptoms, and 
temporary disabilities.  This is in keeping with the 
generally accepted mediation principles that the parties 
be able to participate fully in the process.  Mediation 
programs should have a process allowing individuals to 
request needed accommodations.  The mediator should 
be informed of any disability accommodation that is 
required.  (Simply stated, for a mediation to be 
successful, all parties must be able to attend.  If one 
party is unable to attend because a needed 
accommodation is not provided, the mediation is 
unlikely to go forward.)

Capacity Issues

The vast majority of ADA employment mediations will 
not raise the issue of party capacity.  Where there may 
be an issue of capacity, the Guidelines state that the 
mediator should ascertain who the parties are and 
whether a party understands the nature of the mediation 
process, the role of the mediator, the parties' 
relationship to the mediator, and the issues at hand.  
The mediator should determine whether the party can 
assess options and make and keep an agreement. 

If a party appears to have diminished capacity, or 
capacity is unclear, the mediator should determine 
whether an accommodation would enable the party to 
participate effectively.  If not, the mediator should 
determine if the person could mediate with support, 
such as with an attorney or with another supporting 
person.  If despite support, a party lacks capacity to 
mediate, the mediation cannot proceed unless a 
surrogate participates in the process to represent the 
interests of the party and make decisions on behalf of 
the party. The Guidelines state that the issue of who can 
act as a surrogate is defined by state law, and might 
include agents with powers of attorney, guardians, or 
family members

The Guidelines point out that an adjudication of legal 
incapacity is not necessarily determinative of the 
capacity to mediate, depending on what issue is being 
mediated.  For example, a person might have a 
guardian for financial matters, but not for personal or 
healthcare decisions.  This person could participate in a 
mediation about his/her medical treatment, but would 
need to be represented by a guardian in a mediation 
involving financial issues. A mediation agreement signed 
by a person without legal capacity may require co-
signing by a surrogate to ensure its enforceability.  

Who Will Attend the ADA Mediation?

As in any mediation, the two parties will attend.  If one 
of the parties is a corporation or large organization, it 
may be represented by one or more individuals, 
including managers, human resource representatives, or 
counsel.  An individual with settlement authority should 
be present. 

The Guidelines take the position that the parties may 
each bring a representative of their choice to the 
mediation session.  The representative may be a 
disability rights advocate, expert, vocational rehabili-
tation counselor, job coach, family member, attorney, 
union representative, or other person.  The 
representative may advise and present on behalf of the 
person, but, unlike a surrogate, does not make 
decisions for the person.  A party may bring a support 
person, as a representative or in addition to the 
representative, to assist the person, for example, by 
providing emotional support. 

Persons with disabilities may be accompanied by a 
personal assistant (PA) who is supervised by the person 
with the disability and provides physical aid or other 
assistance.  A qualified sign language or oral interpreter 
has the dual role of being a "disability accommodation" 
for persons who are hearing-impaired or who have 
speech disabilities and of facilitating communications 
between these persons and the other participants in the 
session.

In addition, the parties may engage experts, or the 
mediator, with the permission of the parties, may invite 
a neutral expert, to help educate the mediator and the 
parties about the disability and to assist in developing 
options.  The mediator should also ascertain whether 
the parties have considered the impact of any potential 
agreement on parties who are not at the table, such as 
other employees or a labor union and its members.  The 
impact of the agreement on other parties may affect the 
enforceability, successful implementation, or durability 
of the agreement.

The Reasonable Accommodation Process During 
Mediation 

In ADA Title I cases where reasonable accommodation 
is an issue, the joint session provides the parties with an 
opportunity to further engage in the "interactive 
process" (favored by the EEOC, courts, and 
commentators) to identify or evaluate accommodation 
alternatives.  Generally, the interactive process will have 
been attempted prior to the mediation of a reasonable 
accommodation dispute.  The ADA Mediation 
Guidelines note that when the interactive process is 
taking place in the context of mediation, it must be clear 
that anything said or done - even as part of the 
interactive process - will remain confidential and 
inadmissible as evidence in any legal proceeding, unless 
otherwise agreed to by the parties. 


Confidentiality

Consistent with general confidentiality obligations, the 
Guidelines state that mediators should maintain 
confidentiality of disability-related information when 
arranging access to and conducting the mediation.  
While the person with the disability may have disclosed 
his/her disability, there still may be information that the 
person does not wish to reveal, such as the diagnosis or 
the severity of his/her health problems.  Where a 
mediator believes that disclosure of this information 
would be helpful to the mediation, the mediator should 
invite disclosure by the person with a disability during a 
private caucus, but may not disclose this information 
without permission.

Legal Information and Legal Advice

As is true in any mediation where legal rights are at 
stake, mediators should encourage the parties to 
become aware of their legal rights and responsibilities 
under the ADA prior to the mediation so that the parties 
can participate meaningfully and make informed 
decisions.  While educational materials, such as ADA 
booklets, may be helpful, they are not a substitute for 
legal advice and representation. 

The Guidelines note that before the mediation session 
and at the outset of each session, parties should be 
advised that they may obtain legal or other 
representation.  Parties in an ADA mediation should be 
advised of the risks of not being represented by counsel 
or of not having a potential agreement reviewed by 
counsel.  

The mediator may refer parties to resources to seek 
representation.  Where the mediator believes that a 
party does not understand the implications of a pro-
posed agreement, the mediator should encourage the 
party to consult appropriate sources of information and 
advice. 



Resources:

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), 
www.eeoc.gov, 800-669-EEOC (Voice), 800-800-
3302 (TTY).  Documents on ADA employment issues, 
including policy guidance, 800-669-4000 (Voice), 
800-669-6820 (TTY).

Association for Conflict Resolution, 1527 New 
Hampshire Avenue, NW., Third Floor, Washington, 
D.C. 20036; Phone: 202-667-9700.

The Kukin Program for Conflict Resolution at Benjamin 
N. Cardozo School of Law is the institutional home of 
the ADA Mediation Guidelines.  The ADA Mediation 
Guidelines, with links to other statutes and other 
resources, is posted on the Cardozo Online Journal of 
Conflict Resolution (COJCR), the original publisher of 
the Guidelines at:
www.cardozo.yu.edu/cojcr/guidelines.htm.

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University. 
This publication was created in July, 2000 by Sheila D. Duston, 
an attorney/mediator practicing in the Washington, D.C. 
metropolitan area.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials Development 
Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of the ADA 
(Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of 
new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on 
Employment and Disability, the Pacific Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center, and other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the training and co-
management division of the Northeast Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also conducting 
employment policy and practices research, examining private 
and federal sector employer responses to disability civil rights 
legislation.  This research has been funded by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research  (Grant #H133A70005) and the 
Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability civil 
rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the program on 
Employment and Disability, School of Industrial and 
Labor Relations-Extension Division, Cornell University, 
and funded by a grant from the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation and Rehabilitation 
Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission has reviewed it 
for accuracy.  However, opinions about the Americans 
with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material 
are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect 
the viewpoint of the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's 
interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its ADA 
regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement 
Guidance.
Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute 
on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to 
provide information, materials, and technical assistance 
to individuals and entities that are covered by the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you 
should be aware that NIDRR is not responsible for 
enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, 
and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of 
your legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor 
binding on any agency with enforcement responsibility 
under the ADA.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has 
issued enforcement guidance which provides additional 
clarification of various elements of the Title I provisions 
under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance documents are 
available for viewing and downloading from the EEOC 
web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 


March, 2002	Cornell University
