Health Benefit Plans and the Americans with Disabilities Act



What is the Americans with Disabilities Act?

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) is 
a civil rights law for individuals who currently have a 
disability, have a record of disability, or are regarded 
perceived as having a disability.  The ADA protects 
against disability-based discrimination in employment, 
governmental and commercial activities, 
transportation, and telecommunications.

What disabilities are covered by the ADA?

For purposes of the ADA, a disability is a physical or 
mental impairment-such as a visual, hearing or 
mobility impairment, HIV disease, or mental 
retardation - that substantially limits one or more 
major life activities.  The Supreme Court has clarified 
that an impairment substantially limits the major life 
activity of working if an individual is unable, or is 
regarded as being unable, to perform a broad class of 
jobs.  The Supreme Court also has found that 
reproduction is a major life activity under the ADA. 
HIV infection is a disability from the onset of infection, 
 (before any symptoms appear).

How does the ADA apply to employment?

Employers covered by the ADA may not discriminate 
against "a qualified individual with a disability," -- that 
is, an individual with a disability who meets the 
necessary prerequisites for a job and can perform the 
essential job functions with (or without) reasonable 
accommodation.  ADA Title I applies to employers, 
including employment agencies, labor unions, and joint 
labor-management committees -- with at least fifteen 
employees.  Title I prohibits both purposeful 
discrimination in employment and practices with 
discriminatory impact related to job application 
procedures, hiring, advancement, discharge, 
compensation, training, and to other terms, conditions 
and privileges of employment.  Criteria that have the 
effect of excluding individuals with disabilities from 
employment opportunities may not be used unless the 
criteria are job-related and are justified by business 
necessity.  Title I also establishes the obligation for a 
covered entity to reasonably accommodate a qualified 
individual with a disability, except in the case of undue 
hardship.

May health benefit costs influence employment 
decisions?

No.  Personnel decisions regarding an individual with 
a disability may not take account of whether, or to 
what extent, the individual is or would be covered 
under a health benefit plan.  Employers may not fire or 
refuse to hire a qualified applicant who has a disability, 
or who has a dependent with a disability, in order to 
avoid potential increases in health insurance costs.

Does the ADA apply to Health Benefit Plans?

Yes.  In its 1993 Interim Enforcement Guidance, the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
described how the ADA applies to health benefit 
plans. 

First, the ADA requires employers to provide all 
employees --with a disability or without a disability -- 
the same health insurance benefits.  Thus, an employer 
may not participate in a discriminatory contractual or 
other arrangement with an organization providing 
fringe benefits to employees.  However, eligibility for 
health benefits need not be extended to employees 
with disabilities if such benefits are not extended to 
nondisabled employees in similar circumstances, e.g., 
part-time employees

What coverage classifications does the ADA 
permit?

ADA Title V allows bona fide insured or self-insured 
employee benefit plans to make some health-related 
distinctions based on risk classifications based on or 
not inconsistent with state law.  However, this 
"insurance exemption" may not be used as a 
"subterfuge" to evade the purposes of the ADA.  
According to the EEOC, health insurance distinctions 
that are not disability-based do not violate the ADA, 
even if they have a disproportionate impact on 
individuals with disabilities.

Thus, employers, insurers and unions generally may 
apply insurance distinctions that are uniformly applied 
to all employees, such as applicable limitations and 
exclusions.  For example, employers may offer health 
insurance that does not cover pre-existing conditions 
for a period of time specified in the plan, even if such 
a pre-existing condition exclusion adversely affects 
employees with disabilities. 

The ADA also generally permits facially neutral 
limitations such as lifetime coverage caps applied to all 
employees.  Further, a health plan may exclude or 
limit coverage for specific procedures or treatments if 
they are not exclusively or nearly exclusively 
applicable to a particular disability.  For example, a 
plan may limit the number of blood transfusions or x-
rays that the plan will pay for, even though this may 
have an adverse effect on individuals with certain 
disabilities such as hemophilia.  Likewise, a plan may 
limit or deny coverage for all "experimental" drugs 
and/or treatments for all "elective surgery," and it may 
exclude or provide lower levels of coverage for broad 
categories of conditions that are not drawn along lines 
of disability.  For example, a plan may have lower 
reimbursement rates for treatment of "mental or 
nervous conditions" or for "eye care."

However, all such provisions are allowable under the 
ADA only if they meet the requirements of applicable 
state law and are not used as a subterfuge.  Health 
plan terms also must meet the requirements of other 
applicable federal laws, such as the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act and the Mental 
Health Parity Act.

What is a "disability-based distinction?"

The EEOC's enforcement guidance identifies a plan 
term or provision as disability-based if it singles out a 
particular disability, a discrete group of disabilities, 
disability in general (all conditions that substantially 
limit a major life activity), or a treatment or procedure 
used exclusively or nearly exclusively to treat a 
particular disability.

What justifies a disability-based distinction?
The most reliable way to avoid violating the ADA is to 
not to single out diseases or conditions considered 
disabilities under the ADA.  

However, if the plan does single-out a disability or 
disabilities, the EEOC 1993 Enforcement Guidance 
requires the respondent employer (or employer's 
insurer, if any),  to bear the burden of proof  that a 
disability-based distinction is permitted by (1) showing 
that the health plan either is a bona fide plan that is 
consistent with state law or is a bona fide self-funded 
plan, and (2) proving that the disability-based risk 
classification is not being used as a subterfuge to 
evade the purposes of the law.  Plan sponsors may 
use accepted principles of insurance risk classification 
and current and accurate actuarial data, but not data 
based on myths, fears, stereotypes or false or 
outdated assumptions about a disability.  Disability-
based limitations or exclusions will not be considered 
to violate the ADA if: 

*  they are based on legitimate actuarial data, or 
actual or reasonably anticipated experience, and 
apply equally to conditions with comparable 
actuarial data and/or experience; or
*  they are necessary because no alternative to a 
disability-based distinction is available to prevent 
an "unacceptable" change such as:
•	A drastic increase in premiums, co-payments 
or deductibles;
•	A drastic alteration in the scope of coverage 
or level of benefits; or
•	Other changes that would make the plan 
unavailable to a significant number of other 
employees, or so unattractive that the 
employer could not compete in recruiting and 
maintaining qualified workers due to the 
superiority of health insurance plans offered 
by other employers in the community, or so 
unattractive as to result in significant adverse 
selection.

What is a "subterfuge?"

The EEOC and some courts define "subterfuge" as 
any disability-based disparate treatment that is not 
based on actuarial data or the employer's actual or 
reasonably anticipated experience relating to the risk 
involved.  This means that any coverage limits or 
exclusions based on disability must be justified by 
sound actuarial data or other legitimate business or 
insurance justification. 

For example, a cap on benefits for AIDS-related 
illnesses that was substantially lower than for other 
illnesses would be a disability-based distinction.  The 
lower AIDS cap would violate the ADA unless the 
disability-based distinction can be justified by actuarial 
data.  Studies demonstrating that the cost of AIDS is 
comparable to the costs of other commonly covered 
conditions make it unlikely that this type of disparate 
treatment could be justified.   

A plan also may be found to have used the insurance 
exemption as a subterfuge if it used an AIDS cap to 
deter people with AIDS from accepting employment 
or enrolling in the plan.

A few courts have held that plan practices established 
prior to the ADA's enactment could not be a 
subterfuge to evade the purposes of the Act.  The 
EEOC, however, disputes that the ADA provides a 
"safe harbor" for discriminatory practices that were 
adopted before the ADA.

How does the ADA apply to dependent 
coverage?

Disability-based distinctions involving dependent 
coverage will be analyzed in the same fashion as 
disability-based distinctions in employee coverage.  
The ADA, however, does not require that the 
coverage accorded dependents be the same in scope 
as the coverage accorded employees.  For example, a 
$100,000 benefit cap for employees but only a 
$50,000 for dependents,  would be permitted.

Resources

EEOC materials are available from the U.S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission, 1801 L 
Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20507, Technical 
Assistance --(800) 669-4000 (Voice) and (800) 
800-669-6820 (TTY); 
Publications -- (800) 669-EEOC (Voice) and (800) 
669-3302 (TTY).  The EEOC also maintains a 
website (www.eeoc.gov).

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline, 800/949-4232 
(Voice/TTY).
This brochure is one of a series on human resources 
practices and workplace accommodations for persons with 
disabilities edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, 
SPHR, Director, Program on Employment and Disability, 
School of Industrial and Labor Relations - Extension 
Division, Cornell University. This was written by Gwen 
Thayer Handelman, Scholar in Residence, Nova 
Southeastern University, Shepard Broad Law Center, Fort 
Lauderdale, Florida, in May 1994.  She updated the 
material in July, 2000.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the 
U.S. Department of Education National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research as a National 
Materials Development Project on the employment 
provisions (Title I) of the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  
These updates, and the development of new brochures, have 
been funded by Cornell's Program on Employment and 
Disability, the Pacific Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center, and other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. 
Cornell is also conducting employment policy and 
practices research, examining private and federal sector 
employer responses to disability civil rights legislation.  
This research has been funded by the U.S. Department of 
Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research  (Grant #H133A70005) and the 
Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with 
Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can 
be found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html

For further information, contact the Program on 
Employment and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR 
Extension, Ithaca, New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 
(Voice), 607/255-2891 (TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org


Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment 
and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-
Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded by a 
grant from the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation and Rehabilitation Research (grant 
#H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, 
opinions about the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
expressed in this material are those of the author, and do not 
necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The 
Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its 
ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement 
Guidance.
Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals 
and entities that are covered by the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that 
NIDRR is not responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The 
information, materials, and/or technical assistance are 
intended solely as informal guidance, and are neither a 
determination of your legal rights or responsibilities under 
the Act, nor binding on any agency with enforcement 
responsibility under the ADA.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification 
of various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA. 
 Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing 
and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  
http://www.eeoc.gov 
Health Benefit Plans and the Americans with Disabilities Act
August 2000		CORNELL UNIVERSITY
