Assistive Technology, Accommodations, and the Americans with Disabilities Act



Employers make accommodations for all of their employees. 
 A chair, desk, computer, lighting, and safety equipment 
could all be considered technology accommodations made 
for employees.  Assistive technology is no different; it is 
simply any item that can assist an individual with a disability 
to succeed on the job.  This brochure provides some 
definitions and a starting point for finding the right 
technology to meet the needs of your employees.

What Is Assistive Technology (AT)?
Assistive technology was first defined in the Technology-
Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities Act of 
1988 (P.L. 100-407) as "any item, piece of equipment, or 
product system, whether acquired commercially, modified, 
or customized, that is used to increase, maintain, or improve 
functional capabilities of individuals with disabilities."  
Examples of assistive technology devices include:

*  hearing aids
*  ramps that help people get in and around buildings 
more easily
*  wheelchairs
*  computer modifications to increase accessibility
*  electronic devices that make communication 
possible 
*  equipment on the job that has been modified or 
customized
*  remote control devices that turn appliances, 
computers, lights, radio, etc. on and off
*  magnifier, talking books, closed circuit television, 
Braille note taking computer

Assistive technology services is defined as "any service that 
directly assists an individual with a disability in the selection, 
acquisition, or use of an AT device. An AT service can 
include: (1) evaluation of the AT needs; (2) purchasing, 
leasing, or acquiring the AT; (3) selecting, designing, fitting, 
customizing, adapting, applying, maintaining, repairing, or 
replacing AT devices; (4) coordination and use of therapies, 
interventions, or services with AT devices; (5) training or 
technical assistance for individuals with disabilities, 
professionals, employers, or other individuals providing 
services to individuals with disabilities." Examples of 
technology services include:

*  getting help to know what devices are available
*  getting help to know where to get services
*  getting help to determine what devices are needed
*  getting help to pay for devices
*  getting devices repaired

Assistive technology includes devices and services that help 
people in their daily lives at home, work, school and the 
community.  


How Can AT Assist in the Implementation of the ADA? 
The Americans with Disabilities Act extends full civil rights 
and equal opportunities to people with disabilities in both the 
public and private sectors.  Specifically, the law prohibits 
discrimination on the basis of a physical or mental disability 
in employment, public services, public accommodations, and 
telecommunications.  Assistive technology can play a major 
role in helping to realize the goals of the ADA.

What are some benefits of AT as it relates to the ADA?
AT can play a critical role in complying with reasonable 
accommodations. Providing a reasonable accommodation to 
a job applicant or an employee with a disability can include 
the acquisition or modification of equipment or devices. 
Some AT accommodation examples are:

Sally, born with cerebral palsy, uses an augmentative and 
alternative communication (AAC) device to talk with her 
fellow employees and to present speeches at conferences.

Jason was injured in a fall and uses a wheelchair.  He 
continues to work at his office using equipment that is set 
on lower worktables and has front controls.

Marion, who sustained a head injury from a car accident, 
uses an electronic notebook to help her complete her day-
to-day job-related tasks.

Employers may choose not to hire a qualified individual with 
a disability because they have a limited understanding or 
awareness of how the individual can perform the essential 
functions of the job with the use of AT. In addition, new 
technologies are consistently being developed, many of 
which include designs to accommodate individuals with 
disabilities. Therefore, employers need to realize that like all 
workplace technology that consistently gets upgraded and 
improved, so, too, does AT. 

AT can play a vital role in ameliorating unnecessary risks 
to workers. Under the ADA, employers do not have to hire or 
employ a person with a disability who poses a direct threat, 
i.e., "a significant risk to the health or safety of others that 
cannot be eliminated by a reasonable accommodation."  
For example, a store clerk with poor upper body control 
might use a cart to move heavy supplies rather than carrying 
them across the store and risk dropping them on others. A 
craftsman with cerebral palsy might use a low-tech vice grip 
or clamp to secure and direct a variety of tools and 
equipment as a way or reducing the risk of injury to co-
workers.



What Are Some Typical Accommodations Using AT?
A few examples of the types of AT devices and services that 
provide reasonable accommodations for various types of 
disabilities are provided below.

Blindness or Low Vision

Optical character recognition system (also known as a 
scanner with speech output)
Text-based web browser with screen reading software or 
Braille output
Accessible company websites
Large-print materials
Audiotapes
Qualified reader
Brailler
Computer with voice output
Electronic note taker
Screen magnification product
CCTV (Closed Circuit Television system)
Optical magnifier
Large-print label
Raised lettering on room labels

Hearing Loss or Deafness

Certified sign language interpreter
TTY (Teletype telephone)
Visual or tactile pagers for communication, instructions, 
and as an alerting system
Telephones with amplification devices and visual and 
auditory alerting systems
Fire alarms with visual and auditory alerting systems
Assistive listening devices (e.g., FM, infrared, loop 
systems, and/or closed-captioning decoders)
Captioned video training materials
Real-time captioning for conferences and audio streaming 
of web teleconferences

Mobility Impairments (Multiple Sclerosis [MS], Paraplegia, 
Quadriplegia, Post polio, Carpal Tunnel Syndrome, Repetitive 
Stress Injuries, etc.)

Trackball for easier mouse manipulation
Touch screens 
Ergonomic keyboard
Adjustable keyboard tray
Portable cart
Writing and grip aids
Page turners and book holders
Stand/lean stools
Adjustable height desks and work tables
Speech amplification systems

Cognitive and Developmental Disabilities (Mental retardation, 
autism, cerebral palsy, neurological conditions, etc.)

Telephone auto-dialer
Larger buttons on equipment
Memory aids (electronic notebook, pop-up timer on 
computer)
Communication device 
Voice output with optical character recognition to read 
documents or use a reading pen

Learning Disabilities or Attention Deficit Disorders

Reading template
Automatic line guide
Tape recorder
Computer with voice output
Floor fan or nature tape played on a stereo for white noise
Colored labeling

Psychiatric Disabilities

Room partitions or enclosed office space to reduce noise 
and distractions
Video or audio conferencing meetings

Myths About AT
There are many myths surrounding AT devices and services 
for individuals with disabilities.  These misconceptions may 
impact attitudes and become invisible barriers to an 
individual's independence and productivity.  Common 
misconceptions are:

An AT device is a luxury.  For someone with a disability 
who relies on AT to perform a critical function or achieve a 
desired goal in life, AT is very much a necessity.  A 
computer is a necessary piece of equipment for anyone 
doing data entry even though it could be done with a pencil 
and paper.  Just because a device makes a task easier or 
more convenient to do, does not make it a luxury.

"For most people technology makes things easier.  
For people with disabilities, however, technology 
makes things possible.  In some cases, especially in 
the workplace, technology becomes the great 
equalizer and provides the person with a disability a 
level playing field on which to compete." (A quote 
from Mary Pat Radabaugh, a former employee with 
the IBM Disability Support Center).

AT is expensive and complicated.  The majority of AT 
solutions are simple, inexpensive low-tech devices such as a 
hands-free telephone, magnifiers, or wood blocks to raise 
desk or workstation, which can be found at the local 
hardware or office supply store.  It may also be as simple as 
rearranging a workspace. 

 Even though the term "undue burden" under the ADA 
means that providing an accommodation would result in the 
employer having to incur "significant difficulty or expense," 
according to the Job Accommodation Network (JAN), 80 
percent of the accommodations that it suggests cost less 
than $500. The cost of AT can be shared by the employer, 
the individual, or third-party payers, such as the employer-
supported health insurance for the employee, workers' 
compensation, the state's department of rehabilitation 
services (also known as vocational rehabilitation), 
philanthropic organizations, and AT loan programs. In 
addition, tax credits and tax deductions may also be available 
for providing reasonable accommodations (See the 
Resources section at the end of this publication).

The professional often knows best.  Users of AT often have 
the experience and knowledge that will lead to the best 
solutions for their individual needs.  It is important for 
consumers and professionals to work together to find the 
appropriate AT solution.  

Steps to Take to Ensure Effective Use of AT 
Accommodations
To ensure that the appropriate reasonable accommodation 
will be provided, the following steps should be followed: 

Form a partnership between the employer (or service 
provider) and the individual with a disability.

Focus on ability, not the disability.  Focus on what the 
individual can do. Ask, never assume.

Individualize solutions.  Every individual's needs are 
unique; therefore, the solutions must be individualized 
accordingly.  

Keep it simple.  Simplicity minimizes cost, ease of repair, 
and disruption to the workplace.

Be holistic.  Look at the whole picture when considering 
an accommodation such as the environment, personal, and 
social aspects of the proposed accommodation as well as 
the functional aspects.

Assistive Technology Hierarchy
The following steps can serve as a guide to providing AT 
accommodations.  The steps range from the simplest 
intervention to the most complex intervention:

*  Use no technology - Find an alternative way to do the 
task.  Modify or adapt the task when possible 
(restructure tasks, activities, and the environment to 
compensate for functional limitations, including 
architectural modifications, attendant care arrangements, 
etc.)
*  Use commercially available devices, equipment, aids.
*  Use commonly available devices and equipment in 
creative ways, such as using a wireless doorbell indoors 
to signal.  
*  Modify existing commercial devices, equipment, and 
aids using easily obtainable materials such as Velcro or 
duct tape.
*  Design and fabricate custom devices, equipment, and 
aids. 

Resources:  Where to Find Appropriate AT Services and 
Devices
Assistive Technology Act Projects
The U.S. Department of Education's National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) funds 56 AT 
projects, one in every state and territory, to improve the 
access to and funding for AT devices and services for 
individuals with disabilities of all ages.

Information and referral to all the AT Act Projects is 
available from the:
RESNA Technical Assistance Project
703/524-6686 (V); 703/524-6639 (TTY)
<http://www.resna.org/taproject/at/statecontacts.html>

ABLEDATA
800/227-0216
<http://www.abledata.com/>

Access for All
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/accessforall/

Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers
800/949-4232 (V/TTY)
<http://www.adata.org/>

Global Assistive Technology Exchange
404/894-4960 (V/TTY
<http://www.assistivetech.net/>

Job Accommodation Network (JAN)
800/526-7234 or 1/800/ADA-WORK (V/ TTY)
http://www.jan.wvu.edu <http://www.jan.icdi.uwv.edu/>

TechConnections
877/TEK-SEEK (835-7335) (V/TTY)
<http://www.techconnections.org/>

ADA Technical Assistance Resources

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
800/669-EEOC (V); 800/800-3302 (TTY)
<http://www.eeoc.gov/>

Department of Justice
800/514-0301 (V); 800/514-0383 (TTY)
<http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm>

Tax Credits and Tax Deductions for Workplace 
Accommodations

Disabled Access Tax Credit
This tax credit is available to an eligible small business in the 
amount of 50 percent of eligible expenditures that exceed 
$250 but do not exceed $10,250 for a taxable year.

Architectural Barrier Tax Deduction
Businesses may deduct up to $15,000 of the costs incurred 
each year to remove physical, structural, or transportation 
barriers in the workplace.

Department of Justice
"The Americans with Disabilities Act and Tax Incentives 
Packet"
800/514-0301 (V); 800/514-0383 (TTY)
<http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/taxpack.htm>

Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
IRS Publications 535 and 334 for further information on tax 
incentives, or Form 8826 to claim a tax credit.
800/829-3676 (V); 800/829-4059 (TTY) 

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University.  
It was written in December 2000, by Nell Bailey of RESNA. 

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials Development 
Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of the ADA 
(Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of 
new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on 
Employment and Disability and  the Pacific Disability and 
Business Technical Assistance Center.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disability 
and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also 
conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National Institute 
on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org.



Disclaimer
This material was produced by the Program on Employment and Disability, School 
of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension Division, Cornell University, and funded 
by a grant from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and 
Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those of the 
author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's interpretations of the 
ADA are reflected in its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance 
Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide information, materials, and technical 
assistance to individuals and entities that are covered by the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, and/or technical 
assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, and are neither a determination of 
your legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any agency with 
enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued enforcement guidance 
which provides additional clarification of various elements of the Title I provisions 
under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance documents are available for viewing and 
downloading from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 

Assistive Technology, Accommodations, and the Americans with Disabilities Act
May, 2001	Cornell University
