A Human Resource Perspective on Implementing the ADA

Human Resource (HR) professionals are key players in business 
organizations' implementation of the employment provisions of 
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), which 
prohibits, among other things, discrimination based on disability 
in the workplace. HR professionals are involved with recruitment, 
pre-employment screening and testing, and the reasonable 
accommodation process, as well as benefits, performance 
management, disability leave, and other parts of the employment 
process. Because of this broad involvement, they are in a key 
position to help their organizations realize the intent of the ADA 
and minimize disability employment discrimination. The purpose 
of this publication is to point out some places where the 
contribution of HR professionals can help business 
organizations create a culture and process that will facilitate the 
accommodation requirements of the ADA and minimize the 
likelihood of discrimination against applicants and employees 
with disabilities.

Approximately 14 percent of Americans have some form of 
disability.   Many of these individuals are unemployed or 
underemployed, compared to their non-disabled peers, and 
represent a significant and as yet untapped U.S. labor pool.

In order to examine continuing barriers to employment for people 
with disabilities in the years since the passage of the ADA, the 
Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) partnered 
with Cornell University to conduct a survey of SHRM 
membership in the fall of 1998. The research was based on the 
premise that the implementation of the employment provisions of 
disability nondiscrimination legislation is often a function of HR 
professionals, who are typically responsible for employment 
policies and practices that affect the hiring and retention of 
workers with and without disabilities.  This guide offers 
suggestions for maximizing the contribution of HR professionals 
toward implementation of the ADA, and makes recommendations 
based upon what this survey revealed about SHRM members.

1) Encourage applicants with disabilities, and minimize 
needless discrimination in the application, pre-employment 
screening, and testing process.

Approximately 34 percent of men and 35 percent of women with 
disabilities in the United States were employed during 1999, 
compared to 95 percent of men and 82 percent of women without 
disabilities.  Although the ADA does not require affirmative 
action, as the Rehabilitation Act does for federal contractors of 
$10,000 or more and for recipients of federal funds, these 
statistics affirm that people with disabilities remain a largely 
untapped labor pool. HR professionals can encourage and 
facilitate application by individuals with disabilities for open 
positions by making sure that local agencies that provide 
vocational rehabilitation services are aware of job openings. 
Some of these agencies are state vocational rehabilitation 
agencies (listed in the yellow pages of your phone book), 
supported employment or community rehabilitation programs, 
one-stop or workforce state investment centers, and others.

HR professionals can also assist entry for individuals with 
disabilities by minimizing needless screening-out of people with 
disabilities for positions with pre-employment screening and 
testing. Job applications and job interviews should not include 
medical or disability-related inquiries, nor inquiries about prior 
workers' compensation claims; indeed, the ADA bans such 
inquiries before a conditional job offer is made. Any 
preemployment medical screening must occur post-offer, and 
other pre-employment screening that does occur should be 
consistent with actual job needs and business necessity.

In addition, the recruitment, application, and interview processes 
must be made accessible to candidates with mobility, visual, and 
hearing disabilities. Having recruitment materials and application 
forms in alternate formats, and knowing where to access sign 
language interpreters in your community are examples of good 
preparation for access. Further information about preemployment 
screening and pre-employment testing is available in other 
brochures in this series.

2) Review all employment process policies, procedures, and 
forms for disability discrimination and access considerations

The recruitment and applicant screening process is a good first 
place to start your assessment of the organization's policies and 
procedures in regard to effective outreach to people with 
disabilities, and minimizing barriers in the application and 
screening processes. However, the ADA applies throughout the 
employment process. Therefore, HR professionals must 
scrutinize the entire employment process with disability 
nondiscrimination in mind. For example, benefits programs, such 
as medical and hospitalization, accident, life insurance, 
retirement, and workers' compensation programs should be 
examined to assure equity for persons with disabilities in these 
employee benefit plans. Although employers can use actuarial 
data as approved by their state insurance boards, disability-
specific exclusions or limitations are prohibited.

Equitable access to other benefits of employment, such as use of 
the cafeteria, in-house or contracted sports facilities for 
employee use, and other periodic recreational and social 
activities should also be examined for accessibility to employees 
with disabilities. It should be determined whether facilities are 
accessible to individuals who are mobility-impaired, and whether 
appropriate signage is in place for persons with visual 
impairments.

Employee training and other career development opportunities 
must be equitably available to the organization's employees with 
disabilities. Opportunities for advancement should be made 
available to all employees, and facilities and training approaches 
must be examined to ensure accessibility for employees with 
disabilities. Are web sites or print training announcements 
accessible to persons with visual and hearing impairments? Are 
training facilities wheelchair accessible, and are training materials 
available in alternate formats (large print, disk, audio-tape and/or 
Braille)?

Similarly, grievance, lay-off, termination, and discharge 
processes should be examined to ensure that individuals with 
disabilities are not disparately treated in these processes.

3) Create an organizational structure to support the 
accommodation process

The EEOC encourages an informal, interactive process between 
the employee and the representative of the organization to 
determine reasonable accommodations. The organizational 
representative may be the supervisor, the HR professional, or 
another person. The request for an accommodation may come 
from the individual to the immediate supervisor, but often is a 
multi-level problem solving process that is put into motion when 
an inquiry is made. In the Cornell University study of SHRM 
members, about one-quarter of respondents said that the HR 
person alone made the final decision about accommodations, 
while an additional ten percent said that the HR person was 
involved with other managers in making the decision.

Because an inquiry often will go to the supervisor, it is 
imperative that supervisors are aware of their organization's 
accommodation decision-making process. HR professionals 
should educate them about the accommodation requirements of 
the ADA, and let them know that the HR professional is 
available to assist in the problem-solving process. HR 
professionals can also point supervisors to resources to assist in 
determining what accommodations will effectively meet the 
needs of the individual. These may be resources within the 
organization or within the community at large, including 
ergonomists, health and safety professionals, or employee 
assistance professionals. In addition, if there is a cost involved 
with the accommodation, and the individual business unit is not 
able to meet that cost, a central office may be the place where 
additional assistance can be sought to help with financing a 
particular accommodation.

4) Organizational tracking and recording of accommodations

Although the ADA does not require data keeping on 
accommodations, it can be useful for organizations to put an 
accommodation tracking mechanism in place. This allows the 
organization to document a good faith effort to respond to 
accommodation requests from its personnel. Furthermore, it will 
build its institutional memory of effective accommodations for 
particular job categories and disability issues.

Almost half of the SHRM/Cornell survey respondents indicated 
that their organizations keep data on the accommodations made 
for employees with disabilities so that they will have information 
for future accommodations in similar situations. About one-third 
of respondents also keep data to fulfill regulatory reporting 
requirements, for use in dispute resolution, and for tracking 
accommodation costs. About a third of respondents said their 
organizations do not keep data on the provision of 
accommodations.

5) Top management commitment to disability 
nondiscrimination

No significant organizational change occurs without top-down 
commitment from organizational leadership. Similarly, to ensure 
effective recruitment, hiring, integration, and accommodation of 
individuals with disabilities, top management must affirm and 
effectively communicate the importance of recruiting and 
retaining individuals with disabilities. This can be part of a 
message about the importance of diversity, which should be 
made explicit to engage the administrative and supervisory 
structure of the organization in assisting with this effort. 
Conveying that top leadership sees this as not only a 
compliance issue but good business sends the right message 
and can be a significant motivator for more effective workplace 
compliance with the ADA. In the Cornell University study of 
SHRM members, high-level management commitment was seen 
as the most effective way to minimize continuing barriers for 
people with disabilities in the workplace.

6) Clarify position requirements and performance expectations 
The ADA does not require employers to have written job 
descriptions. But properly prepared job descriptions are critical 
in effective performance management. Accurate job descriptions 
are a tool to effectively recruit and retain good employees, 
including people with disabilities. Job descriptions are a road 
map for supervisors, interviewers, medical staff, even applicants 
and employees throughout the employment process.

An up-to-date job description identifying the position's 
essential functions should be prepared prior to recruitment and 
posting. A copy can be given to applicants, so that a need for an 
accommodation can be identified and addressed, as necessary. 
Job descriptions can also be used to further clarify performance 
expectations once a person has been hired. Persons with 
disabilities can be held to the same performance standards as 
others in the job category, but necessary reasonable 
accommodations must be provided, unless it would be an undue 
hardship to do so.

7) Provide training and continuing communication on ADA 
requirements

Training is key. Training is important at all levels of the 
organization. Not just interviewers. Not just hiring supervisors or 
administrators, but all employees. Why? The ADA isn't just a 
law to provide equal access to individuals with disabilities. It's 
also about sensitivity, about looking at our behaviors and 
attitudes to determine whether we may be part of the problem in 
ensuring equal access. This allows us to make sure we are part of 
the solution in providing equal employment opportunity.

SHRM membership respondents in the Cornell study reported 
conducting extensive training for their HR professionals, but 
significantly less training for supervisors in business 
organizations. To be truly effective, disability nondiscrimination 
training must reach to the supervisory level to inform 
supervisors of their responsibilities under the ADA. Useful 
training topics include: confidentiality requirements of medical 
information, nondiscrimination in the disciplinary or termination 
processes, nondiscriminatory recruitment and hiring practices 
defining essential job functions, and the accommodation 
process. Further information on training and the ADA is found 
in another brochure in this series.

8) If in a unionized environment, involve your union 
representatives

The union can play a role in helping an individual with a 
disability to get the accommodation they need to perform 
effectively in the workplace. Your unions are also subject to the 
ADA regulations. You will want to work closely with them to 
ensure there is flexibility in the contracts to allow 
accommodations to be made, if appropriate. The regulations 
suggest that the terms and conditions of a collective bargaining 
agreement may be used as a factor in determining whether an 
accommodation would be an undue hardship. However, you will 
want to look at all the factors and focus on good faith efforts 
with the union. The key is to focus on the joint legal obligation 
to ensure that an employee with a disability gets a necessary 
reasonable accommodation.

In the SHRM/Cornell study, respondents indicated that unions 
could contribute to the accommodation process in the following 
ways: providing representation in reasonable accommodation 
discussions, providing advice or information on ways to 
accommodate employees with disabilities, providing 
representation in grievance discussions when accommodation 
requests are denied, and consulting with employers on revising 
employment policies. Unions also provided information on the 
rights of employees with disabilities.

9) Use your disability management and diversity programs to 
support ADA compliance

Respondents in the Cornell University study reported that one 
of the areas where they made the most effort to make changes in 
response to the ADA was co-worker and supervisor attitudes 
towards people with disabilities. This was also seen as one of 
the most difficult areas to change. This feedback from SHRM 
members suggests that attitudinal issues continue to be a 
problem in the workplace for people with disabilities, and that 
continuing attention should be directed toward addressing 
attitudinal barriers. Diversity programs may be an area where 
sensitivity training or disability awareness training can occur. 
Again, affirming the organization's commitment to hiring and 
retaining individuals with disabilities in the workforce, as well as 
raising awareness of disability etiquette, can effectively assist in 
dealing with attitudinal issues in the workplace about people 
with disabilities.

If your organization has a disability management or return-to-
work program, this can be an area that supports ADA 
compliance. The structure and requirements of such programs 
lend themselves to increasing awareness of the importance of 
confidentiality, raising acceptance of people with disabilities in 
the workplace, increasing supervisor awareness of reasonable 
accommodation requirements, and creating an organizational 
structure for accommodations. The value of disability 
management programs in supporting ADA good practice was 
also shown by the Cornell University Study of SHRM 
Membership

10) Use internal and community resources to address 
accommodation needs

There are numerous individuals who, because of their role or 
their particular expertise, should be identified and engaged in the 
organization's overall accommodation process. Although the 
decision about an accommodation is unique to the individual, 
their disability, and the nature of their job, there are numerous 
resources that may be used for each individual's situation. Some 
of the specific experts that can contribute to identification of the 
most appropriate accommodation for a particular disability are 
ergonomists, physical therapists, occupational therapists, health 
and safety professionals, and employee assistance 
professionals. These are often individuals who are working 
within larger organizations whose expertise can be applied to the 
accommodation process as needed. In addition, benefits 
specialists and labor relations representatives may also be able 
to assist with a particular accommodation request. Identifying 
these individuals, and bringing them together on a regular basis 
to build a sense of the cultural appropriateness of 
accommodation and the importance of working together to 
generate positive outcomes is an important part of an effective 
accommodation process within an organization.

In addition to the above noted resources that may be found 
internally in any medium-sized and larger business settings, 
there are many community resources that can assist in the 
clarification and identification of accommodations for persons 
with specific disabilities. State vocational rehabilitation agencies 
have vocational counselors that can be of assistance, and in 
some cases can help with financing accommodations that are 
beyond the resources of the employer or the specific needs of 
the employment setting. In addition community centers for 
independent living can assist with accommodation inquiries that 
relate to facility accessibility or assistive technology, as well as 
helping the individual with personal needs such as housing and 
transportation. Many of these organizations are listed in the 
yellow pages of the phone book.

Conclusion

Implementation of the ADA program for your organization will 
take time and effort. But taking a proactive approach to outline 
your plan is much more effective than reacting later to specific 
issues or problems. You can take the cautious approach, the 
insightful approach, or the visionary approach. If employers are 
sensitive and programmatic in their implementation philosophy 
and plan, we will start to make some strides in equal employment 
opportunity for all individuals, including those with disabilities.

Resources

ADA Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center 
Hotline, 800/949-4232 (voice/TTY).

Program on Employment and Disability Cornell University 
School of Industrial and Labor Relations 101 ILR Extension 
Ithaca, NY 14850 (607) 255-7727 (voice); (607) 255-2891 (TTY) 
(607) 255-2763 (fax) http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped

Society for Human Resource Management 1800 Duke Street 
Alexandria, Virginia 22314 USA (703) 548-3440 (phone); (703) 
535-6490 (fax) http://www.shrm.org

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 1801 L Street, 
NW Washington, DC 20507 (800) 669-4000 (voice); (800) 800-
3302 (TTY) (800) 666-EEOC (publications). http://www.eeoc.gov

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University.  
It was written by Susanne Bruyère.  Kay N. Robinson, SPHR, 
and Assistant Vice Chancellor, developed a previous version of 
this brochure.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials Development 
Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of the ADA 
(Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of 
new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on 
Employment and Disability and the Pacific Disability and 
Business Technical Assistance Center.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disability 
and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also 
conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National Institute 
on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
 This material was produced by the Program on Employment and 
Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension Division, 
Cornell University, and funded by a grant from the National Institute 
on Disability and Rehabilitation and Rehabilitation Research (grant 
#H133D10155). The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission has reviewed it for accuracy. However, opinions about the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are 
those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher. The 
Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its ADA 
regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance Manual for Title 
I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on Disability 
and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide information, materials, 
and technical assistance to individuals and entities that are covered by 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). However, you should be 
aware that NIDRR is not responsible for enforcement of the ADA. The 
information, materials, and/or technical assistance are intended solely as 
informal guidance, and are neither a determination of your legal rights or 
responsibilities under the Act, nor binding on any agency with 
enforcement responsibility under the ADA.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification of various 
elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA. Copies of the 
guidance documents are available for viewing and downloading from the 
EEOC web site at: http://www.eeoc.gov
  U. S Bureau of the Census (2000) Supplementary Survey Summary 
Tables, QT-02. Profile of Selected Social Characteristics: 2000
  Copies of the full SHRM report are available from the SHRM Store 
at 1-800-444-5006. An Executive Summary is available on-line at 
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/
  U.S. Bureau of the Census (2000). Current Population Survey 2000. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.

A Human Resource Perspective on Implementing the ADA
July, 2001		Cornell University
