Policy Brief:
Summary Review of Data Sources To Evaluate School to Work Transitions by Youth 
with Disabilities
Prepared by:
The Lewin Group
David C. Wittenburg

Cornell University
David C. Stapleton

September 2000


[Asterisk (*) indicates endnote, and is followed by number. All endnotes are 
listed in number order at the end of the paper.] 

Abstract

This brief summarizes our findings from a review of potential data sources to 
examine school-to-work transitions by youth with disabilities (Wittenburg and 
Stapleton, 2000).  Our objective was to identify data sources for future school-
to-work analyses that contain longitudinal information on youth with 
disabilities.

We conclude that the following data sources are most promising based on our 
selection criteria: Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP); National 
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health); Rehabilitation Services 
Administration (RSA) 911 Database and RSA's Longitudinal Study of Vocational 
Rehabilitation (VR); state administrative data (multiple states); National 
Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88); National Longitudinal 
Transition Study of Special Education Students (NLTS); National Longitudinal 
Transition Study of Special Education Students-2 (NLTS-2); and National 
Longitudinal Survey of Youth: 1997 (NLSY:97).
Introduction

Numerous survey and administrative data sets provide information on youth with 
disabilities.  Some provide information on specific populations (e.g., special 
education students), while others include broader samples of the United States 
population. 

This brief summarizes our findings from a review of potential data sources to 
examine school-to-work transitions by youth with disabilities (Wittenburg and 
Stapleton, 2000).  We reviewed several data sources to identify information that 
could address the following five research questions:
1. Which factors influence the development of a youth's skills for employment?*1
2. What determines the level and type of effort devoted to preparing the youth 
for employment?
3. What type of initial employment and program participation transitions do 
youth with disabilities make after they have completed their formal schooling?
4. What are the employment, income, and program participation outcomes for 
adults who had childhood disabilities, and how do they vary with individual 
characteristics and childhood circumstances?
5. What effect do current public policies have on the incentives for youth 
making transitions from school-to-work?

Because of the broad scope of the research questions, our review should be of 
interest to anyone interested in conducting longitudinal research on school-to-
work transitions by youth with disabilities.  In future work, we will conduct an 
empirical analysis using a subset of the data sources highlighted in this brief 
on school-to-work transitions by youth with disabilities. 

Data Sources Reviewed
In Wittenburg and Stapleton (2000) we presented detailed reviews for several 
data sources, which we split into the following categories (Exhibit 1):
- Longitudinal Surveys of the General Population; 
- Longitudinal Surveys of Youth;
- Longitudinal Surveys of Youth with Disabilities;  and
- State Administrative Data; 

The longitudinal surveys of the general population provide information on a 
nationally representative sample of the U.S. population.  While these surveys do 
not focus specifically on youth, they contain longitudinal information on a 
large sample of youth with disabilities.  The longitudinal surveys of youth 
provide information on different cohorts of youth (under the age of 22).  These 
surveys contain information on various youth outcomes (e.g., school achievement) 
and influences (e.g., parental time) that are generally unavailable in surveys 
of the general population.  Some of these surveys also include information on 
adult outcomes. The longitudinal surveys of youth with disabilities provide 
information on different cohorts of youth with disabilities.  Unlike the surveys 
of youth, these surveys focus on specific populations of youth with 
disabilities. Finally, we summarize two types of administrative data sources 
that contain data from various state and federal programs.*2  These data contain 
information on transitions by youth with disabilities into and out of various 
state and federal programs (e.g., Vocational Rehabilitation (VR), Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), and Medicaid).
  

Exhibit 1: Summary of Data Reviewed

Longitudinal Surveys of the General Population
Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) 
Survey of Program Dynamics (SPD)
Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID)
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)

Longitudinal Surveys of Youth 
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health)
National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88)
High School and Beyond (HS&B)
Beginning Postsecondary Student Longitudinal Study (BPS)
Baccalaureate and Beyond Longitudinal Study (BB:93)
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth: 1979 (NLSY79)
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth: Mothers and Children (NLSY: Mothers and 
Children)
National Survey of Youth: 1997 (NLSY97)
Longitudinal Surveys of Youth with Disabilities
National Longitudinal Transition Study of Special Education Students (NLTS)
National Longitudinal Transition Study of Special Education Students-2 (NLTS2)
School-to-Work Transition Survey of Deaf Youth (SWTS)

Administrative Data
Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) 911 Database and Longitudinal Study 
of the Vocation Rehabilitation Service Program
Selected State Administrative Data (California Welfare Research Archive, The 
Florida Education and Training Performance Information Program, and Illinois 
Integrated Database on Children's Services)

Selection Criteria
We selected the most promising data sources for future work on school-to-work 
transitions by youth with disabilities using six criteria.  First, each of the 
selected data sources contains detailed information on health and/or disability 
program participation.  Second, each of the selected data sources contains a 
sample of youth with disabilities (at least 500 observations).  Third, each of 
the selected data sources contains information on a broad population of youth 
with disabilities.  Fourth, each of the selected data sources includes recent 
information (compiled since at least 1992) on outcomes for either youth or young 
adults with disabilities.  Fifth, each of the selected data sources contains 
specific information to address at least one of our research questions.  
Finally, none of the selected data sources contains heavy "planned" or 
"unplanned" attrition.*3 

Summary of Selected Data Sources 
We concluded that the following data sources are most promising for longitudinal 
school-to-work research based on our criteria:
- Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP);*4
- National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health);
- Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) 911 Database and RSA's 
Longitudinal Study of the Vocational Rehabilitation (VR);	
- State Administrative Data (multiple states).
- National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88);
- National Longitudinal Transition Study of Special Education Students (NLTS); 
- National Longitudinal Transition Study of Special Education Students-2 (NLTS-
2); and
- National Survey of Youth: 1997 (NLSY97);

The SIPP, Add Health, RSA 911 Database (and longitudinal study), state 
administrative data, NELS:88 and the NLTS provide relatively current information 
on youth with disabilities.  Researchers have already used the NLTS, NELS:88, 
and state administrative data to address issues related to our research 
questions (Wagner, et al, 1996, Horn and Bobbitt, 1999, Goerge, et  al., 1996).  
In addition, the Research Triangle Institute plans to use the RSA data for a 
study on youth with disabilities in the VR systems.*5  The NLTS-2 and NLSY-97 
provide information that will be valuable in the future studies (the NLTS-2 will 
not be available until 2001 and the NLSY-97 currently only contains one wave of 
available data). We are unaware, however, of any past or on-going study that 
uses data from the SIPP or Add Heath to examine school to work transitions by 
youth with disabilities.  

Below, we highlight the types of research questions that researchers could 
address with each of these data sources.  Exhibit 2 summarizes our findings.

Exhibit 2: Summary of the Most Promising Data Sets to Address Questions Related 
to Youth with Disabilities
		
Question 1: Which factors influence the youth's preparedness for employment?
Add Health
RSA 911 and Longitudinal Survey
NELS:88
NLTS
NLTS-2
NLSY-97

Question 2:  What determines the level and type of effort devoted to preparing 
the youth for employment?		
Add Health
NELS:88
NLTS
NLTS-2
NLSY-97

Question 3: What type of employment and program participation transitions do 
youth with disabilities make after they have completed their formal schooling?
 SIPP
RSA 911 and Longitudinal Survey
State Admin Data*6
NELS:88
NLTS
NLTS-2
NLSY-97

Question 4: What are the employment, income, program participation, and 
independent living outcomes for adults who had childhood disabilities, and how 
do they vary with individual characteristics and childhood circumstances?
SIPP *7
State Admin Data
NLSY-97

Question 5: What effect do current public policies have on the incentives for 
youth making transitions from school-to-work?
SIPP 
RSA 911 and Longitudinal Survey
State Admin Data
NLSY-97

1. SIPP
Researchers could use restricted research files of the SIPP that are matched to 
Social Security Administrative (SSA) data on earnings and program participation 
records over several years to address questions related to short term (2 to 3 
years) and long-term (5 to 15 years) transitions by youth with disabilities 
(research questions 3, 4, and 5).*8  The SIPP contains detailed information on 
demographic and health characteristics of large samples of youth with 
disabilities and the matched SSA records provide employment and SSA program 
participation information over a person's lifetime.  Researchers could, for 
example, use these matched data to observe transitions into work (using SSA 
earnings records) or SSI (using SSA program records) by youth with disabilities 
(age 14 to 22) over their young adulthood (age 23 to 30).  We have performed 
similar analyses in a recent evaluation of transitions by former AFDC recipients 
onto SSI in Stapleton, et al. (2000).

2. Add Health
Researchers could use Add Health data to address questions related to the early 
schooling and training experience of youth with disabilities (research questions 
1 and 2).  Add Health contains extensive information on family, school, and 
community characteristics for a large nationally representative sample of youth 
with and without disabilities in grades 7 through 12 in 1995, collected from 
students, parents, and/or administrators.  Unlike most data sources, the Add 
Health includes very specific information on the types of parental investments 
(e.g., parental time, expectations) that the youth receives during high school.  
Researchers could use these data to examine issues related to the child's human 
capital development.  For example, researchers could examine whether the level 
and type of investments provided by parents vary depending on the child's 
disability status.

The major limitation of these data is that only one follow-up interview exists.  
Hence, these data only provide very limited information on the outcomes of 
school-to-work transitions.

3. Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) 911 Database and RSA's 
Longitudinal Study of Vocational Rehabilitation (VR)
Researchers could use the RSA 911 longitudinal study to address questions 
related to initial post-secondary outcomes and factors that influence those 
outcomes (including factors related to policy changes) (research questions 1, 3, 
and 5).*9  These data contain detailed descriptive information on individuals 
who received VR services, including for a significant number of youth with 
disabilities.  Because of the large samples included in the RSA databases, 
researchers can also use these data to make cross-state comparisons of 
employment and program participation outcomes.  

The major limitation of these data is that they only provide a relatively 
limited period to observe transitions.  Hence, while these data might provide 
excellent information on initial post-school outcomes, they will not provide 
information on long-term adult outcomes (e.g., over 10 years after the youth 
leaves secondary school).  

The RSA data could be further enhanced if they were matched to SSA records on 
earnings and program participation. While there are no plans to match the RSA 
data to SSA records at this time, the RSA data does include SSNs.*10 Hence, it 
is technically possible to link these data to SSA administrative records. 
Similar to the matched SIPP/SSA data, the major advantage of a matched file of 
RSA/SSA data is that they would contain information to examine long-term 
transitions by youth with disabilities.

4. State Administrative Data
Several state administrative databases (California, Florida, Illinois) could be 
used to address questions related to short- and long-term transitions by youth 
from various programs (e.g., AFDC, SSI) into work or other programs (research 
questions 3, 4 and 5).  The major advantage of state administrative data is that 
they provide information on the experiences of youth who participate in a 
program or multiple programs (e.g., Medicaid, Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families, Special Education) in a particular state.

Unlike survey data, one major obstacle in using state administrative data is 
accessibility.  Many states place confidentiality restrictions on the use of 
data. Hence, these data might be more costly to obtain than the public data sets 
mentioned above. Further, some states may not release their data for various 
other reasons (e.g., expense, political sensitivity of the research).

5. NELS:88
Similar to Add Health, the NELS:88 data are most promising to address questions 
related to the early schooling and training experience of youth with 
disabilities (research questions 1 and 2), as well as initial transitions from 
school-to-work (research question 3). NELS:88 provides extensive information on 
a cohort of eighth graders as they move through high school. Researchers can use 
these data to observe how changes in multi-period factors (schooling, 
environment, home) influence the youth's preparedness for employment and school 
outcomes.  A follow-up interview is conducted two years after the youth is 
scheduled to finish high school that researchers could use to analyze immediate 
high school-to-work (or other school) transitions. 

There are two major limitations of the NELS:88.  First, it excludes a large 
number of youth with severe disabilities, including those from separated special 
education schools, area vocational schools, those in "ungraded" classrooms, and 
those deemed by local staff to be unable to participate because of physical 
disability, mental illness, or language. Hence, these data do not provide 
representative information on large samples of youth with specific limitations.  
Second, NELS:88 only provides information on youth up to age 20.  Hence, these 
data do not provide long-term employment and other outcomes.  

6. NLTS 
Researchers could use the NLTS to address questions related to the schooling 
experience (research questions 1 and 2) and initial transitions from school made 
by youth from special education programs (research question 3).*11  Because the 
NLTS only samples youth in special education programs, essentially all of the 
NLTS respondents have some type of disability.*12  Researchers could use these 
data to evaluate the youth's experience while in school, such as the type of 
investments received (e.g., teacher time), as well as their experiences as they 
finish their secondary education, using responses from the three NLTS follow-up 
interviews. 

A major drawback of the NLTS data is that they only contain information on a 
1987 student cohort.  The experiences of the NLTS cohort of special education 
students might not necessarily represent the more recent experiences of youth 
with disabilities.  To address this limitation, the Department of Education is 
funding a new NLTS survey (NLTS-2). Another issue is that it is difficult to 
compare findings from this survey to findings for youth without disabilities 
from other surveys.

7. NLTS-2
Researchers could use the NLTS-2 data in the future to address the same types of 
questions as the NTLS, except for a more recent cohort of special education 
students (fall 2000).  The strengths and limitations of the NLTS-2 are similar 
to the original NLTS because it includes the same target sample (special 
education students), though the NLTS-2 will follow this sample for a much longer 
period than the original NLTS (approximately ten years vs. four years).

8. NLSY-97
In the future, the NLSY-97 could be a valuable data source for analyzing 
transitions by youth with disabilities to address issues related to all of our 
research questions.  These data include a relatively large sample of youth with 
disabilities from a recent cohort that will be followed for several years.  In 
addition, unlike the surveys mentioned above, researchers can use the NLSY-97 to 
compare the experiences of youth with disabilities to those without 
disabilities. 

Because the initial interview sample only includes individuals age 12 to 16 in 
1997, researchers will not be able to observe school-to-work transitions in the 
NLSY:97 for most of the sample until approximately 2004, when the youngest 
person in this sample reaches 18.  Consequently, the NLSY-97 provides promise 
for future research, but is very limited in its current form.

Bibliography

Blackorby, J., and M. Wagner (1996). "Longitudinal Postschool Outcomes of Youth 
with Disabilities: Findings from the National Longitudinal Transition Study." 
Exceptional Children, 62(5), 399-413.

Horn, L. and Bobbitt, L. (1999).  Students with Disabilities in Postsecondary 
Education:  A Profile of Preparation, Participation, and Outcomes/  Statistical 
Analysis Report for the National Center for Education Statistics. 

Huggins, V. and K. King (1998). "The Survey of Program Dynamics: Sample Design, 
Weighting and Attrition Issues."  1998 ASA Proceedings Section on Survey 
Research Methods.

Goerge, R., Mackey-Bilaver, L., Joo Lee, B., Koepke, D., and Harris, A.  (1996).  
Service Utilization and the Individual, Family and Neighborhood Characteristics 
of Children with Disabilities in Illinois. Final Report to the Office of the 
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, September 30, 1996.

SRI International (1993). What Makes a Difference? Influence on Postschool 
Outcomes of Youth with Disabilities, Report for the Office of Special Education 
Programs, December.

Stapleton, D., M. Fishman, G. Livermore, D. Wittenburg, A. Tucker, and S. 
Scrivner (1999). Policy Evaluation of the Overall Effects of Welfare Reform on 
SSA Programs.  Final Report submitted to Social Security Administration.

Wagner, M. and J. Blackorby (1996). "Transition from High School to Work or 
College: How Special Education Students Fare." Special Education for Students 
With Disabilities, 6(1), pp.103-120.

Wittenburg, D., and D. Stapleton (2000) Review of Data Sources for School to 
Work Transitions by Youth with Disabilities,  Report prepared for the 
Rehabilitation Research and Training Center for Economic Research on Employment 
Policy for Persons with Disabilities, available on-line at: 
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/rrtc/papers.html.  

Endnotes

1. Researchers refer to this more formally as the process of human capital 
accumulation.  

2. Another major source of administrative data that we do not provide a separate 
review for is Social Security Administrative records on Supplemental Security 
Income participation, Disability Insurance participation, and earnings.  We do 
have, however, a detailed discussion on the advantages of using these records in 
the context of our summary of other data sources that have been linked to SSA 
data, such as the SIPP.   

3. Planned attrition occurs when only a subsample of the base population from 
the first interview is included in the follow-up interview.  Unplanned attrition 
occurs when interviewers cannot conduct a follow-up interview with a base sample 
member.  

4. The SIPP, however, is somewhat limited if researchers can not obtain 
restricted research files that are matched to SSA earnings and program 
participation files. 

5. A review of these studies will be available in our upcoming literature 
review.  

6. We discuss the advantages and limitations of using administrative data from 
various states (see Section V for more details). 

7. Researchers can use matched records from the SIPP and Social Security 
Administration records on earnings and program participation to address this 
issue.  

8. If the matched data are not available, then the ability to use the SIPP to 
address research questions 3, 4, and 5 is limited primarily because of the short 
SIPP panel (approximately 32 months).  One potential alternative is to match the 
1992 and 1993 SIPP panels with the Survey of Program Dynamics (SPD), which 
continues those SIPP panels.  This match would provide information over a ten-
year period.  Unfortunately, Huggins and King (1998) found that the SPD has 
significant attrition bias.  Further, sample size issues might limit the SPD's 
usefulness to evaluate specific issues related to school-to-work transitions.

9. The RSA 911 Database (without the Longitudinal Study) could also be used to 
address some of these research questions, though the information in the 
Longitudinal Study significantly enhances the 911 Database.  

10. Previous matches exist of RSA/SSA data in the early eighties.

11. Several researchers have already used the NLTS to evaluate postschool 
transitions (SRI International, 1993; Blackorby and Wagner, 1996; Wagner and 
Blackorby, 1996).

12. Further disability assessments could be made based on survey information 
provided by students, parents, teachers, and school administrators (e.g., 
specific health conditions, difficulties with certain activities).


Send comments on paper to:
David Wittenburg, The Urban Institute 
2100 M Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20037 
dwittenb@ui.urban.org
Phone: (202) 261-5352 
Fax:   (202) 833-4388 

This paper is being distributed by Rehabilitation Research and Training Center 
for
Economic Research on Employment Policy for Persons with Disabilities at Cornell
University.

This center is funded to Cornell University, in collaboration with The Lewin 
Group
(Falls Church, VA), by the U.S. Department of Education, National Institute on
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (Grant No. H133B980038).

This research and training effort is an across college effort at Cornell 
University
between the Program on Employment and Disability in the Extension Division of
the School of Industrial and Labor Relations, and the Department of Policy 
Analysis
and Management in the College of Human Ecology. The Lewin Group is an interna-
tionally
recognized research and consulting firm specializing in health and human
services policy and management.

The Co-Principal Investigators are:
Susanne M. Bruyère-Director, Program on Employment and Disability,
ILR Extension, Cornell University
Richard V. Burkhauser-Sarah Gibson Blanding Professor and Chair, Department of
Policy Analysis and Management, College of Human Ecology, Cornell University
David C. Stapleton-Senior Vice President and Director of Applied Economics with
The Lewin Group
