Working Effectively with 
Persons who have 
Cognitive Disabilities

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It has been updated by Sharon Davis, Ph.D.
Director, Professional and Family Services, The Arc of the 
United States, from the original, which was written in 
January 1994 by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., C.R.C., Director, 
and Thomas P. Golden, Training Coordinator, Program on 
Employment and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor 
Relations, Cornell University.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org



What Is the ADA?

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 is a federal 
law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in 
the areas of employment, public accommodations, 
transportation, and telecommunications services.  The first 
section of the law, Title I, governs employment 
discrimination.

What Does Title I Say About Employment?

Title I of the ADA provides that employers cannot 
discriminate against qualified applicants and employees 
with disabilities.  A qualified individual with a disability is 
an individual who meets both the educational and 
experience requirements of a position held or desired and 
can perform the essential functions of the position with or 
without a reasonable accommodation.  Providing a 
necessary reasonable accommodation is a key part of the 
ADA's nondiscrimination requirements. 

What is Reasonable Accommodation? 

Reasonable accommodation is any modification or 
adjustment to the application process, a job, an 
employment practice, or the work environment that makes 
it possible for a qualified individual with a disability to 
participate in and enjoy an equal employment opportunity. 
The employer's obligation to provide a reasonable 
accommodation applies to all aspects of employment. The 
duty is ongoing and may arise any time a person's 
disability or job changes.  An employment opportunity 
cannot be denied to a qualified applicant or employee 
because of the need to provide reasonable accommodation. 
 However, the ADA does not require an employer to 
provide a reasonable accommodation that will impose an 
undue hardship on the operation of its business

An undue hardship means that an accommodation would 
be unduly costly, extensive, substantial or disruptive, or 
would fundamentally alter the nature or operation of the 
business.  According to the ADA, if the cost of an 
accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the 
employer, and no outside funding is available, the individual 
with a disability must be given the option of paying for the 
portion of the cost that causes the undue hardship or 
providing the accommodation.   The employer and the 
employee should discuss what the employee's needs are 
and together determine an effective reasonable 
accommodation through an informal interactive process.


Who is Likely to Need an Accommodation for a 
Cognitive Disability?

Cognitive disabilities are disabilities that affect a person's 
awareness; memory; and ability to learn, process 
information, communicate, and make decisions.  They 
affect a person's cognition, that is, the act or process of 
knowing, including awareness and judgment.  "Cognition" 
refers to "understanding," the ability to comprehend what 
you see and hear, and to infer information from social cues 
and body language.  People with these impairments may 
have trouble learning new things, making generalizations 
from one situation to another, and expressing themselves 
through spoken or written language. Cognitive limitations 
can arise at any age but those encountered in people of 
employable age are very likely to have existed since 
childhood; in this case the limitation may have affected life 
experience as well as school learning.  

Cognitive limitations of varying degrees can often be found 
in people who have been classified in school as having a 
learning disability, mental retardation, autism, multiple 
disabilities, or who have been diagnosed as having 
traumatic brain injury.   It is important, however, not to 
approach an individual with any preconceived notions as to 
his or her specific capabilities.  Since the type of supports 
needed is highly individual, an employer should take time to 
get acquainted with the applicant or employee and 
structure job accommodations accordingly.

What Considerations Might be Important in the Job 
Application and Interview Process?

Individuals with cognitive disabilities may require help 
during the job application and interview process.  Some 
easy accommodations to make during this process could 
include:

?	using multiple formats to advertise job postings, such 
as newspaper and radio advertising.
?	simplifying and minimizing wording on the job 
application;
?	clarifying issues and assisting an individual in 
completing information required on the job application;
?	conducting a verbal interview to obtain job application 
information that may be more complex in nature and 
difficult to put in writing;
?	allowing others to help the applicant fill out the 
application;
?	describing job requirements clearly, concisely and 
simply, or showing the person the job;


?	adjusting length of interview to maximize applicant's 
ability to remain attentive and decrease stress levels; 
and
?	interviewing in a quiet, informal, distraction-free 
environment.

What About Job Training and Performance 
Considerations? 

Individuals with cognitive disabilities may have relevant 
work experience, but sometimes will require job training.  
In this case, the reasonable accommodation needed may be 
to have added assistance in job training. This type of 
accommodation could mean that the employer or 
supervisor:

?	spends additional time in training the new employee;
?	breaks job tasks down into smaller steps that are more 
clearly defined;
?	use very clear and basic language to provide job 
instructions;
?	develops a set routine in a job;
?	develops a consistent work sequence;
?	allows the employee to use alarm watches or timers;
?	develops pictures or diagrams showing the job 
sequence to assist in learning tasks;
?	teaches the employee with the disability how to follow 
the example of co-workers to learn work routines and 
appropriate work behaviors;
?	encourages co-worker involvement in ongoing 
support, if needed; and
?	provides extended supervision.

The employer should maintain an open relationship with the 
employee regarding performance and work behavior 
expectations.  The employer or supervisor should take time 
to orient the employee to company rules as presented in the 
basic orientation training or company handbook.  The 
employer must be sure the employee understands the 
expected quantity and quality of work and how that will be 
judged.  

Another accommodation may involve job restructuring.  
The employer would reallocate or redistribute to others the 
job functions that an employee is unable to perform 
because of the cognitive disability.   Job functions may 
also be exchanged among employees, so that the employee 
with a disability is assigned job functions that other 
employees may have performed.  The result is a 
restructured job that accommodates the employee's 
disability.  The employer does not have to eliminate an 
essential job function when restructuring a job.  A person 
who cannot perform an essential function, a fundamental 
duty of the position, is not considered qualified for the job. 
 However, an employer could modify when or how an 
essential function is performed.  For example, allowing an 
employee to do paperwork in the morning when s/he is 
more rested rather than at the end of the day, or allowing 
the use of talking software instead of traditional word 
processing software.

The employer may also provide a reasonable 
accommodation by allowing an employee with a disability 
to work a modified or part-time schedule. An example of 
this is allowing an employee who depends on public 
transportation to adjust work arrival and departure times to 
coincide with the bus schedule.  Another example is job 
sharing where two individuals with a disability each work 
half time to perform one full-time job.

Other accommodations include making existing facilities 
accessible, acquiring or modifying equipment used in the 
job, and, as a last resort, reassignment to a vacant position.

What Is Reasonable Accommodation Related to 
Benefits and Privileges of Employment?

The ADA's mandate to accommodate includes all aspects 
of employment.  The benefits and privileges of 
employment are those enjoyed by similarly situated 
employees without disabilities.  Examples of benefits and 
privileges include training; services such as cafeterias, 
credit unions and transportation; and parties and other 
business-related social functions.  The person with a 
cognitive disability may need assistance in fitting in with 
co-workers. The employee might need added assistance to 
be included in company social events, to participate in 
employer-sponsored training, and to be considered for job 
advancement and promotional opportunities.  

Supports of this nature could include:

?	developing a transportation network to aid the 
employee in attending social activities;
?	facilitating relationships with co-workers;
?	ensuring the employee with a disability has access to 
information communicated to all employees;
?	ensuring accessibility of training activities; 
?	having the trainer adapt materials and instruction to 
meet the needs of employees with cognitive disabilities;
?	investigating other jobs for promotion potential; and
?	modifying a workplace policy to accommodate the 
employee's disability


Are There Other Possible Considerations in Working 
with People with Cognitive Disabilities? 

The ADA encourages an informal, interactive, reasonable 
accommodation process, which starts with the employer 
and the person with the disability jointly exploring what the 
best accommodation might be to support the individual. In 
the case of a person with cognitive disabilities, it may be 
desirable to involve someone who can serve as an advocate 
and assist in communication, such as a job coach, family 
member, or rehabilitation counselor in this process.  The 
potential employee should, to the maximum extent possible, 
be central in these discussions.

Individuals with cognitive disabilities who aspire to enter 
the job market generally have some sense of their own 
limitations.  In fact, such a sense is usually a positive 
indicator of success; at the same time, the individual is 
likely to be sensitive to the stigma attached to his or her 
limitations and eager not to be identified as "retarded" or 
"stupid."  The initial encounter is therefore very important. 
 Creating an atmosphere of acceptance and trust at the 
outset facilitates accessibility and is a good business 
practice.

While an individual with a cognitive disability may require 
support in the various areas discussed, it is important to 
check with the individual regarding the level of support that 
he or she may need.  Other considerations may include:

?	not speaking in so simple, loud, or basic a manner as 
to offend the individual;
?	assigning and matching jobs that appropriately 
challenge and engage the individual;
?	speaking directly to the individual regarding matters of 
concern;
?	encouraging natural social relationships with co-
workers; and
?	when using adaptations, job modifications or other 
supports, making sure the individual with the disability 
is included in deciding which kinds of aids will be 
useful.

Where Can I Find Resources to Assist in the 
Accommodation Process? 

The local office of the state vocational rehabilitation agency 
and other community-based employment agencies for 
people with cognitive disabilities are possible resources for 
 job coaches to assist the individual in the job application 
process, learning the tasks of the job, and sustaining and 
progressing in the job. Additional resources are listed 
below.


Resources

President's Committee on Employment of People with 
Disabilities
1331 F St., Suite 300
Washington, DC 20004. 
(202) 376-6200 (voice); (202) 376-6205 (TTY). 
[www.pcepd.gov]. 
PCEPD answers employment questions and funds the Job 
Accommodation Network (see below).

Job Accommodation Network 
1-800-526-7234 (VTTY). 
[www.jan.wvu.edu/]  
The Job Accommodation Network is an international toll-
free consulting service that provides information about job 
accommodations and the employability of people with 
disabilities.

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical 
Assistance Center Hotline
(800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY).  
This connects the caller to the nearest Disability and 
Business Technical Assistance Center established in ten 
regions specifically to answer questions about the 
Americans with Disabilities Act.

State Offices of Vocational Rehabilitation, 
[http://janweb.icdi.wvu.edu/sbses/VOCREHAB.HTM]
This site locates each state vocational rehabilitation agency. 
These agencies coordinate and provide a number of 
services for people with disabilities, including counseling, 
evaluation, training and job placement.

The Association for Persons in Supported Employment 
(APSE)
1627 Monument Avenue
Richmond, VA 23220
phone(804) 278-9187
[http://apse.org/]
Information on supported employment for people with 
cognitive disabilities.

The Arc of the United States
1010 Wayne Ave., Suite 650
Silver Spring, MD 20910
(301) 565-3842
[http://TheArc.org] 
Contact The Arc for information on employment of people 
with mental retardation and related disabilities.



The Arc's Publications Desk, 3300 Pleasant Valley Lane, 
Suite C, Arlington, Texas 76015, ((888) 368-8009.  
[www.TheArcPub.com]
Video and brochure: Everybody Wins! Tips for 
Supervising the Employee with Mental Retardation and 
other employment publications.

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
1801 L Street, NW
Washington, DC  20507
This is the federal agency that deals with ADA title I 
issues.  To be connected to the nearest field office, call 
(800) 669-4000 (voice); (800) 669-6820 (TTY). . 
To order publications, call (800) 669-3362 (voice); 
800) 800-3302 (TTY). 
Publication on line: Enforcement Guidance: Reasonable 
Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans 
with Disabilities Act.  [Available at 
http://www.eeoc.gov/docs/accommodation.html]

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices 
and workplace accommodations for persons with disabilities 
edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, 
Program on Employment and Disability, School of Industrial 
and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell 
University.  It has been updated by Sharon Davis, Ph.D.
Director, Professional and Family Services, The Arc of the 
United States, from the original, which was written in 
January 1994 by Susanne M. Bruyère, Ph.D., C.R.C., Director, 
and Thomas P. Golden, Training Coordinator, Program on 
Employment and Disability, School of Industrial and Labor 
Relations, Cornell University.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research as a National Materials 
Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the 
development of new brochures, have been funded by Cornell's 
Program on Employment and Disability, the Pacific 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and 
other supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast 
Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center. Cornell 
is also conducting employment policy and practices research, 
examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been 
funded by the U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  (Grant 
#H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on 
Employment of Adults with Disabilities.  

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be 
found at: www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports 
relating to employment practices and policies on disability 
civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment 
and Disability, Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, 
New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 (Voice), 607/255-2891 
(TTY), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical 
Assistance Program and Regional Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-4232 (voice/TTY), 
www.adata.org

Disclaimer
This material was produced by the program on Employment and 
Disability, School of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension 
Division, Cornell University, and funded by a grant from the National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation and Rehabilitation Research 
(grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material 
are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint 
of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher. 
 The Commission's interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its 
ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 1630), Technical Assistance Manual 
for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide 
information, materials, and technical assistance to individuals and 
entities that are covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, 
and/or technical assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, 
and are neither a determination of your legal rights or responsibilities 
under the Act, nor binding on any agency with enforcement 
responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued 
enforcement guidance which provides additional clarification of 
various elements of the Title I provisions under the ADA.  Copies of 
the guidance documents are available for viewing and downloading 
from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 
Working Effectively With Persons Who Have Cognitive Disabilities


October, 2000  CORNELL UNIVERSITY
