Workplace Accommodations for Persons with Musculoskeletal Disorders

Any disease, injury, or significant impairment to muscles, bones, joints, and 
supporting connective (soft) tissues is considered to be a musculoskeletal 
disorder (MSD).  Approximately 14 million Americans have musculoskeletal 
disorders, which are the leading cause of disability among individuals of 
working age (18 to 64 years of age).  Annual costs of MSDs [Occupational and 
Safety Health Act (OSHA) standard (proposed Fed Reg #, month, year)] are 
estimated to be:
- $15-$20 billion in workers compensation costs alone
- $45-$50 billion total when including other expenses

Many people with musculoskeletal disorders are considered individuals with 
disabilities under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  An individual 
with a disability is a person who: has a physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a record of such an 
impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment.  Whether a person's 
impairment substantially limits a major life activity depends on its nature and 
severity, how long it will last or is expected to last, and its permanent or 
long-term impact or expected impact.

Musculoskeletal disorders vary greatly in severity and degree of permanence.  
The provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) do not apply 
to every musculoskeletal disorder.  The ADA does not cover physical problems 
that are relatively minimal in nature and severity (e.g., a sprained toe or 
pulled muscle) or will heal in a short time.  

Job Application Process

Before the passage of the ADA, some employers attempted to screen out persons 
with disabilities during the hiring process out of fear that these people 
represented an undue safety and workers' compensation risk.  Employers used pre-
placement medical examinations to identify the particular disability the 
applicant had and then used this information to make a hiring decision.  The 
trouble with this approach was that the candidate had no chance to show the 
employer whether he could actually perform the job. 
 
The employment provisions of the ADA (Title I) protect all qualified individuals 
with disabilities from discrimination in all employment decisions.  
Specifically, employers may not inquire about an applicant's medical history 
before making a conditional offer of employment.  After a job offer is made, an 
employer may make disability-related inquiries or require medical examinations 
as long as this policy is applied consistently to all entering employees in a 
particular job category.  All medical information collected is confidential and 
must be kept in a separate locked file.  The employer cannot assume that the 
applicant is limited in performing the job's essential functions merely because 
he has a disability.  If the post-offer inquiry shows that the prospective 
employee will be unable to perform the job without posing a significant risk of 
harm to himself or others, the employer must first determine if the risk cannot 
be reduced or eliminated by reasonable accommodation before refusing to hire 
this individual.

What Is Reasonable Accommodation?

Reasonable accommodation is the critical concept in the employment provisions 
(Title I) of the ADA.  It is any modification or adjustment to a job, employment 
practice, or work environment that enables a qualified individual with a 
disability to participate in and enjoy equal employment opportunity.  The 
employer's obligation to provide a reasonable accommodation applies to all 
aspects of employment. This duty is ongoing and may arise anytime a person's 
disability or job changes, unless the accommodation causes an undue hardship to 
the employer.  A qualified applicant or employee cannot be denied an employment 
opportunity because of the need to provide reasonable accommodation.  

The ADA requires that employers consider all sources of outside funding when 
assessing whether a particular accommodation is too costly.  This could include 
funding from outside organizations or tax credits or deductions.  Moreover, if 
the cost of an accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the employer, the 
individual with the disability should be given the opportunity to provide the 
accommodation or to pay the portion of the cost that would otherwise constitute 
an undue hardship for the employer.

What Types of Accommodations Should Be Considered?

Workplace changes for people with musculoskeletal disabilities fall into two 
general categories: engineering accommodations and administrative 
accommodations.

Engineering accommodations include changes to the physical work environment and 
equipment such as:

- Selecting the right tool for a given job.  Tools come in many different sizes, 
shapes and capacities.  Tools should be selected that minimize physical stress 
so that workers don't have to reach or bend their wrists; the tools don't 
produce high pressure on workers' hands; and the worker does not become fatigued 
as a result of holding or operating the tool.  In addition to selecting the best 
tool, many accessories are now available to help support the tool and resist 
reaction forces.
- Providing adjustable workstations (e.g. work tables, keyboard trays, monitor 
holders and seating).  Remember that people differ in size and the way they do 
things.  We do not expect all workers to wear the same size or style shoes and 
we should not expect them to all use the same size workstation or tools.
- Utilizing lift devices such as lift tables, tilt tables and mechanized lift 
assists.  Lift tables bring items up off the floor and tilt tables reduce the 
horizontal reach. Both pieces of equipment decrease the amount of forward torso 
bending to load or unload work objects.

Administrative accommodations include changes in the manner in which work is 
performed such as:

- Periodic breaks (including micro-breaks, i.e. small recovery periods each work 
cycle or short breaks each hour).
- Avoiding incentive systems that discourage breaks.
- Education by a health care provider for injured workers that explains their 
condition and how to pace themselves to avoid re-injury.
- Education by supervisors and engineers for all workers on how to adjust work 
equipment, what to do if equipment is not working correctly and where to go for 
medical services.
- Worker rotation.  It is important to make sure that work loads on the 
different jobs vary enough to provide recovery from high work demands.
- Providing sufficient time for new workers to learn and become accustomed to 
the physical demands of new jobs.

Utilization of these measures will not only make it possible for employers to 
meet the requirements of the ADA, but will also help prevent future injuries and 
disabilities and satisfy present and future OSHA requirements.

Returning the Work-Disabled Employee to the Job

Providing reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities applies not 
only to the hiring process, but also to employees who are returning to work 
after a workers' compensation claim.  The individual with a disability is 
expected to perform the essential functions of the job with or without 
reasonable accommodation.  These functions may be considered essential for 
several reasons: 

1) the position exists so that the function can be performed;
2) a limited number of employees are available among whom the performance of the 
job function can be distributed;
3) the function is highly specialized so that the incumbent in the position is 
hired for her expertise or ability to perform it.  

The individual with a disability does not need to be able to perform the 
marginal (nonessential) functions of the job.  If the employee is otherwise 
qualified to perform a job but requires a reasonable accommodation to accomplish 
an essential job function, she cannot be discriminated against in being hired or 
in returning to work.  Employers are not required to hire or retain individuals 
who pose a direct threat to the health and safety of himself/herself or others.  
The employer has an obligation to prove that a direct threat exists and that the 
threat cannot be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level through reasonable 
accommodation.

Maximizing Employee Potential for Success

As with any significant change in the work environment, making job site 
accommodations for a disabled employee may have implications for effective labor 
relations.  For example, an assembly-line worker with a low-back disability is 
reintroduced into the workplace following a job-related injury.  He is able to 
return to his job because of modifications to his workstation that decrease the 
physical demands of the job and help to control his symptoms.  Other employees 
with the same job title or union seniority, however, may want similar changes to 
their workstations to make their jobs less physically demanding.

The employer may feel this is a no-win situation.  Not only does she have to pay 
for the disabled employee's accommodation, she also has to face the backlash 
from other workers who consider the accommodations a form of favoritism to which 
they are not entitled.   Employee education about the ADA may be helpful in this 
situation.  

  An employer may not disclose that a particular employee has a disability or 
needs a reasonable accommodation.  However, employees who have been informed 
about the ADA's protections in a general manner will understand that an employer 
must provide a reasonable accommodation that will enable an employee with a 
disability to perform the essential functions of his job and thus remain a 
productive member of the workforce.  If accommodations are viewed in this way, 
there is a distinction between accommodating a disabled worker and making 
adjustments for able-bodied workers that make their jobs less physically 
demanding.  While an employer may always choose to make ergonomic changes that 
help to prevent worker injuries, the ADA's requirements only extend to qualified 
individuals with disabilities.   

If the dialogue between labor and management concerning the  obligation to 
accommodate the individual with a disability is handled  cooperatively, other 
employees will come to understand that different people can perform the same job 
in different ways and that the ADA will also protect them in the event of a 
future disability.  By working closely with labor to ease the assimilation of 
individuals with disabilities back into the workplace, employers can  achieve a 
result that is beneficial to all involved, and can create an atmosphere which 
facilitates the resolution of future conflicts.   Employers may wish to consult 
experts in the field of labor relations and the ADA for additional guidance.

Beyond the ADA

Understandably, employers worry about the impact of the ADA on the cost of doing 
business.  In most cases, however, accommodating a worker cost less than 
disability compensation does.  Employers, in fact, have much to gain by 
investing in ergonomic redesigns to the entire workplace that go beyond the 
intent of the ADA.  It has been estimated, for example, that the proper design 
of manual handling tasks can reduce by up to one-third the incidence of 
industrial back disorders.  

Matching individuals to jobs, emphasizing employee skills and abilities, rather 
than limitations, and designing work stations and environments that minimize the 
likelihood of injury will lead to positive outcomes benefiting both employers 
and employees.  In addition, jobs incorporating ergonomic design principles will 
often have positive impacts on product quality and employee productivity.  Joint 
labor-management ergonomics programs are effective at identifying workplace risk 
factors and interventions.

Resources

If you have more specific questions about the ADA or Musculoskeletal disorders, 
please consult the resources listed below.

ADA Regional Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center: 1-800-949-4232 
(voice/TTY); web: www.advoc4disabled.state.ny.us

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission: 1801 L Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 
20507, 800-669-4000 (voice) to reach EEOC field offices; for publications call 
800-800-3302 or
800-669-EEOC (voice/TTY); web: www.eeoc.gov

Job Accommodation Network (JAN): West Virginia University, P.O. Box 6080, 
Morgantown, West Virginia 26506-6080, telephone 800-526-7234; web: 
www.jan.wvu.edu

The University of Michigan Center for Ergonomics: 1205 Beal, IOE Building, Ann 
Arbor, MI  48109-2117, 734-763-0133 (voice); web: 
www.engin.umich.edu/dept/ioe/C4E/ 

Other Web-Based Resources

American Board of Industrial Hygiene (ABIH): abih.org

American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienist (ACGIH):
www.ACGIH.org

American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA):
www.aiha.org/index.html

Americans with Disabilities Act:
www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm

ANSI accredited Z365 Committee on Work Related Cumulative Trauma Disorders:
www.nsc.org/z365.htm

Board of Certification of Professional Ergonomics (BCPE): www.bcpe.org

Board of Certification of Safety Professionals (BCSP): 
www.cfpa.com/accreds/bcsp.html

Ergonomics Society: www.ergonomics.org.uk

ErgoWeb Inc.: www.ergoweb.com/

FAA Human Factors Design Guide: 
www.hf.faa.gov/ACQUIRE/design_guide/design_guide.html

Human Factors and Ergonomics Society: hfes.org/

I Can Online: ican.org

International Commission on Occupational Health (ICOH): 
www.who.ch/ina/ngo/ngo043.htm

International Ergonomics Association: www.who.int/ina-ngo/ngo/ngo062.htm

Microsoft Accessibility Support: www.microsoft.com/enable

NAS Workshop on Musculoskeletal Injuries, August 20 & 21, 1998 Report: 
www.nap.edu/bookstore/index.html

National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research: 
silk.nih.gov/silk/NCMRR/default.htm

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH): 
www.cdc.gov/niosh/homepage.html
National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR): 
www.ed.gov/offices/OSERS/NIDRR/

National Rehabilitation Information Center: www.cais.com/naric

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA): www.osha.gov/

Orthopaedic Section, American Physical Therapy Association, Inc.:
www.orthopt.org

Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of North America 
(RESNA): www.resna.org/

Thomas Register: www2.thomasregister.com

University of Michigan Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center, Ergonomic 
Solutions for Employment: umrerc.engin.umich.edu

We Media: www.wemedia.com

This brochure is one of a series on human resources practices and workplace 
accommodations for persons with disabilities edited by Susanne M. Bruyère, 
Ph.D., CRC, SPHR, Director, Program on Employment and Disability, School of 
Industrial and Labor Relations - Extension Division, Cornell University.  It has 
been updated in June, 2000, by Sheryl Ulin, Ph.D., C.P.E., Research 
Investigator, The University of Michigan Center for Ergonomics from the 
original, which was written by Frank N. Morosky, M.S., P.T., the coordinator of 
the Cornell University Back Injury Prevention Program, Ithaca, NY.

Cornell University was funded in the early 1990's by the U.S. Department of 
Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research as a 
National Materials Development Project on the employment provisions (Title I) of 
the ADA (Grant #H133D10155).  These updates, and the development of new 
brochures, have been funded by Cornell's Program on Employment and Disability, 
the Pacific Disability and Business Technical Assistance Center, and other 
supporters.

Cornell University currently serves as the Northeast Disability and Business 
Technical Assistance Center. Cornell is also conducting employment policy and 
practices research, examining private and federal sector employer responses to 
disability civil rights legislation.  This research has been funded by the U.S. 
Department of Education National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research  (Grant #H133A70005) and the Presidential Task Force on Employment of 
Adults with Disabilities.

The full text of this brochure, and others in this series, can be found at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/ada.  Research reports relating to employment practices 
and policies on disability civil rights legislation, are available at: 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/ped/surveyresults.html.

For further information, contact the Program on Employment and Disability, 
Cornell University, 102 ILR Extension, Ithaca, New York 14853-3901; 607/255-2906 
(Voice), 607/255-2891 (TDD), or 607/255-2763 (Fax).

More information is also available from  the ADA Technical Assistance Program 
and Regional Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers, (800) 949-
4232 (voice/TTY), www.adata.org.

Disclaimer

This material was produced by the Program on Employment and Disability, School 
of Industrial and Labor Relations-Extension Division, Cornell University, and 
funded by a grant from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
and Rehabilitation Research (grant #H133D10155).  The U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has reviewed it for accuracy.  However, opinions about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) expressed in this material are those 
of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the viewpoint of the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission or the publisher.  The Commission's 
interpretations of the ADA are reflected in its ADA regulations (29 CFR Part 
1630), Technical Assistance Manual for Title I of the Act, and EEOC Enforcement 
Guidance.

Cornell University is authorized by the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) to provide information, materials, and technical 
assistance to individuals and entities that are covered by the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA).  However, you should be aware that NIDRR is not 
responsible for enforcement of the ADA.  The information, materials, and/or 
technical assistance are intended solely as informal guidance, and are neither a 
determination of your legal rights or responsibilities under the Act, nor 
binding on any agency with enforcement responsibility under the ADA.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has issued enforcement guidance 
which provides additional clarification of various elements of the Title I 
provisions under the ADA.  Copies of the guidance documents are available for 
viewing and downloading from the EEOC web site at:  http://www.eeoc.gov 



Workplace Accommodations for Persons with Musculoskeletal Disorders
June, 2000	CORNELL UNIVERSITY

